FAppendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century
to the Present . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 239
Appendix B: Plants Used by the Nahua, Arranged by Family . . . . . . . . . . 313
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 349
Contents
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019 1
A. O. Tucker, J. Janick, Flora of the Voynich Codex,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19377-5_1
Chapter 1
An Introduction to the Voynich Codex
The Mysterious Codex
The Voynich Codex is a bizarre, profusely illustrated manuscript that has been considered the most mysterious manuscript ever written. The work is encyclopedic and
has been divided by convention as follows:
Herbal, 127 pages containing 131 plant images plus text (Fig. 1.1)
Pharmaceutical, 20 pages with 228 small images of plants or plant parts, plus
apothecary jars, many labeled with symbolic script (Fig. 1.2)
Balneological, 19 pages with nude nymphs, singly or in groups, many cavorting in
pools with strange plumbing or vascular systems (Fig. 1.3)
Astrological, 12 pages containing signs of the zodiac surrounded by nymphs,
mostly nude (Fig. 1.4)
Cosmological, 16 pages including combinations of the sun, moon, planets, and
stars (Fig. 1.5)
Rosette, a large insert the size of 6 pages, with 11 circles or rosettes resembling a
kabbalah tree-of-life symbol that is a map of central Mexico cities and volcanos
(Fig. 1.6)
Recipe, 23 pages of text, probably medicinal prescriptions, or possibly poems or
incantations, with each phrase highlighted by a six- to eight-pointed star in the
left margin (Fig. 1.7).
The Voynich Codex includes symbolic writing, referred to as Voynichese, that has
evaded decipherment by eminent cryptologists, and its original language has been
under dispute. The symbolic script follows rules of languages, and the suggestion
that the Voynich Codex is a modern hoax has been universally discredited. Robert
Brumbaugh (1978) assumed it was a forgery, whereas Gordon Rugg (2004a, b)
declared it was gibberish. These theories have been tested by modern cryptographic
analysis based on the frequency of letters or words. Antoine Casanova (1999) concluded that the Voynich Codex had the qualities of a synthetic language whose 
2
alphabet was subject to transformations. M.  A. Montemurro and D.  H. Zanette
(2013) demonstrated that the language organization is complex, but the distribution
of words is compatible with real language sequences and the distribution of letters
follows Zipf’s law, as in other languages. D. R. Amancio et al. (2013) concluded
that words display compatibility with natural languages and are incompatible with
random texts.
Provenance
An untitled manuscript was purchased by a Polish book dealer, Wilfred Voynich
(Fig. 1.8), in the Villa Mondragone at Frascati, Italy. This patrician complex,
constructed in 1573 on the site of a Roman villa, had been transformed into a Jesuit
college for young aristocrats in 1865 and was discreetly selling off parts of its
library.
The work, now known as the Voynich Codex, has long bedeviled historians of
science. It has been traced to the Emperor Rudolf II (1576–1612), Emperor of the
Holy Roman Empire (Fig. 1.9) and a collector and connoisseur of art. A 1667 letter
to the Jesuit scholar Athanasius Kircher from Joannes Marci, Rector of Prague,
noted that the manuscript was sold to Rudolf II for 600 gold ducats. Its association
with the court of Rudolf II was confirmed by the embedded signature on the first
page of the manuscript of Jacobi à Tepeanecz, the 1607-ennobled name of Jaobus
Fig. 1.1 Herbal section phytomorphs: (a) folio 1v, Ipomoea arborescens; (b) folio 93r, Helianthus
annuus; (c) folio 23v, Passiflora sp. section Decaloba; cf. P. morifolia
1 An Introduction to the Voynich Codex
3
Horĉicky (1575–1622), Imperial Chemist and personal physician of Rudolf II.
However, the origin and the author of the work has been a mystery.
Wilfrid Voynich considered the manuscript to be the work of Roger Bacon
(ca. 1219–1292), but his attempts to sell it at a high price ($160,000) after he moved
to the United States were unsuccessful. After the death of Wilfrid Voynich’s wife,
Ethel Lilian Boole, in 1960, the manuscript was sold to the book dealer H.P. Kraus,
who also failed to sell it. In 1969 it was donated it to the Beinecke Rare Book &
Manuscript Library at Yale University, where it now resides as Manuscript 408.
Fig. 1.2 A page in the Pharmaceutical section (folio 100r) with 16 images of phytomorphs labeled
in Voynichese symbols and two apothecary jars
Provenance
4
Fig. 1.3 Balneological images of nude nymphs: (a) folio 75v; (b) folio 77v; (c) folio 78v; (d)
folio 83v
1 An Introduction to the Voynich Codex
5
Fig. 1.4 Astrological signs with Mexican animals: (a) folio 70r, Pisces represented by an alligator
gar; (b) folio 71v, Cancer represented by Mexican crayfish; (c) folio 72r(1), Leo represented by on
ocelot; and (d) folio 73r, Scorpio represented by a jaguarundi
Dating and Origin of the Codex
In 2011, the University of Arizona issued a press release on the age of the Voynich
Codex vellum using carbon dating (Stolte 2011). Dr. Gregory Hodgins of the university’s Department of Physics performed the analysis in 2009 using an accelerator
mass spectrometer to measure the ratio of 14C (carbon-14) to 12C (carbon-12) in four
snippets of the manuscript. The samples dated from 1404 to 1438. Following this,
Hodgins made several oral presentations and announcements with additional data,
but the information has not been published (Zandbergen 2012).
This fact, as well as its provenance in Italy, has led to the widely held view and
current dogma that it was a fifteenth century European work. However, botanical
evidence indicates that the work contains New World plants (O’Neill 1944; Guy
1991; Tucker and Talbert 2013; Tucker and Janick 2016; Janick and Tucker 2018),
which contravenes the conventional wisdom based on the dating of the vellum.
A Mexican connection to the Voynich Codex had been hinted at by Jacques B.M. Guy
(1991), proposed by James C. Comegys (2001), published in a peer–reviewed journal by Arthur O. Tucker and Rexford T. Talbert (2013), and reported in an unpublished manuscript by John D. Comegys that appeared online in 2014 (copyrighted
2013). This hypothesis was fully expanded in Unraveling the Voynich Codex by
Jules Janick and Arthur Tucker (2018). A signature in the first botanical image provides evidence that the author was Gaspar de Torres, a Spaniard of Jewish heritage
born in Santo Domingo, and Master of Students of the Colegio Imperial de Santa
Cruz at Tlatelolco 1568–1572. Ligated initials on the same folio suggests that the
Illustrator was Juan Gerson, an indigenous artist (tlacuilo) born in Mexico (Janick
and Tucker, 2017).
Dating and Origin of the Codex
Fig. 1.5 Cosmological image, folio 68r(3), showing sun and labeled stars, including the Pleiades
star cluster in section 1
Fig. 1.6 The Rosette page, folio 86v: (a) oriented with suns in an East-West position, representing
a kabbalah-like map. (b) Schematic diagram of folio 86v
7
The connection of the Voynich Codex to sixteenth century New Spain suggests
that the book was either a palimpsest written over the vellum of an old book, or
simply written on reused vellum that was known to be imported to the Colegio
Imperial de Santa Cruz. In New Spain in times of scarcity, use was made of already
printed paper, which was sold as a waste product (Reyes 1948, cited in Romero
Ramírez 2013:39 Vol. 1), and new Spanish paper was available in the large market
at Tlatelolco from paper sellers called amanamac or amaoztomecatl (Hirth 2016).
Reused parchment was available at the scriptorium of El Colegio de Santa Cruz de
Tlatelolco in New Spain (Gravier 2011). Researchers from the Bodleian Library at
the University of Oxford have demonstrated that the Codex Selden, also known as
the Codex Añute (1560) and written on a deer hide, was a palimpsest written over a
pre-colonial manuscript (Snijders et al. 2016).
Evidence of a New World origin is supported by the following:
1. The plants are indigenous to the New World or circumboreal, with the exception
of one weedy Spanish introduction.
2. The animals identified are indigenous to the New World, including alligator gar,
armadillo, coati mundi, caecilian, jaguarundi, horned lizard, Mexican crayfish,
and ocelot, or are Spanish introductions.
Fig. 1.7 The first entry of folio 103r in the Recipe section, showing symbolic script known as
Voynichese
Fig. 1.8 Wilfrid Voynich
(1865–1930)
Dating and Origin of the Codex
8
3. The landmarks in the Rosette page (folio 86v) include cities and volcanoes of
central Mexico.
4. The first botanical illustration includes the ligated initials of Juan Gerson,
Tlacuilo (“JGT”), an indigenous artist of Mexico, and the name “Gasp.Torres”
(Gaspar de Torres), born in Santo Domingo and master of students at the Colegio
Imperial de Santa Cruz.
Description of the Work
The Voynich Codex is composed of folded sheets called folios, each composed
of two pages numbered recto (r) (right side) and verso (v) (reverse side). Folios
are referred to by their individual numbers as 1r, 1v, 2r, 2v, and so on, up to
116v. However, 14 folios are missing (12, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 74, 91, 92, 97,
98, 109, 110). Adjusting for missing folios and foldouts of two to four pages, the
original work is equivalent to 262 pages, but only 234 remain. The folios are
bound into set quires of four folios (8 pages each) and sewn together, but
improper binding has altered the original sequence so that some of the sections
are not contiguous.
Fig. 1.9 Emperor Rudolf
II (1552–1612), portrait by
Hans von Aachen
1 An Introduction to the Voynich Codex
9
Illustrations
With the exception of the recipe section, almost every page contains tinted illustrations drawn with a pen and most tinted with a limited palette of four colors:
blue, red, green, and red-brown. Pigment analysis in 2009 by McCrone Associates
Inc. of Westmont, Illinois, indicated that symbols are made with iron gall ink
made by reaction of iron sulfate with oak galls. The green pigment was a copper and
copper-chlorine resinate, probably derived from atacamite. The blue pigment was
derived from azurite, and the red-brown pigment was red ochre derived from hematite. The binder was unidentified but was not gum arabic. The blue and red-brown
pigments are compatible with a New World origin; the green pigment is unlikely to
be of European origin because European greens were only rarely derived from a
source of copper-chlorine pigment such as decayed bronze (which provides paratacamite, not atacamite).
Decipherment
Attempts to decipher the Voynich Codex have failed gloriously. The fact that William
Friedman, the world’s most eminent cryptologist and breaker of the Japanese Purple
cipher, has been unsuccessful in deciphering Voynichese suggests that ciphers or
secret writing is not involved. Friedman’s conclusion, published in a cipher code
revealed in 1970, indicates that Voynichese is an artificial or universal language of
the a priori type (i.e., an invented or synthetic language).
Decipherment of the plain text of the Voynich Codex requires both that the
symbols be decoded phonetically (transliteration) and that the appropriate language
be identified (translation). The simplest interpretation of Voynichese, consisting of
about 37 symbols, is that they are derived from scribal shorthand of sixteenth century New Spain; these transliterate to either a Nahuatl lingua franca or a phonetic
alphabet or syllabary of either a real and/or an invented language.
The labeled plants in the Pharmaceutical section provided a path to a decipherment of the symbols. Tucker and Talbert (2013) decoded the Voynichese symbols
based on the identification of two plants derived from primary names, nāshtli, a
phonetic derivative from Nahuatl, nochtli (Opuntia ficus indica) and māgueoy,
derived via Taino from maguey (Agave atrovirens). Other plant names expanded the
symbol decoding, and although none were previously recorded Nahuatl names,
many were descriptive in the manner of Nahuatl names. This decoding system
allowed decipherment of Nahuatl cognates and some cities and words, including
dialects of Nahuatl, Latin American Spanish, Mixtec, Huastec, and Taino,; that gave
us confidence that the decoding was on the right track, but much to our chagrin, it
failed strict Classical Nahuatl. It might be a synthetic language (as suggested by
William Friedman) composed of various indigenous languages. We are convinced
that a Nahuatl dialect is involved, because the decoded symbols identified the city
Decipherment
10
of Huejotzingo, confirming a previous independent identification. We agree with
William Friedman that Voynichese may be a mixed synthetic language. It probably
was invented from various contemporary languages such as Latin American Spanish
(including Nahuatl, Taino, and other languages of central Mexico) and perhaps a
North African Arabic dialect for astronomical names extant in sixteenth century
New Spain. Another possibility was a Nahuatl lingua franca used in commerce by
the pochteca, Aztec traders (Dakin, 1981; Janick and Tucker, 2018).
Objectives
It is our belief that the inability to decipher the symbols and translate Voynich
Codex stems from the erroneous belief that the manuscript must be a European
work. This has led to plant misidentification, wrong linguistic analysis, and circular
reasoning. We are convinced that the original sin of failure to correctly identify the
plants of the Voynich Codex as New World plants and accept the possibility of New
World languages is a serious error in Voynich Codex scholarship. The objective of
this work has three interconnected objectives:
1. Identification of all plants in the Herbal section of the Voynich Codex and many
in the Pharmaceutical section
2. Association of the plants with Aztec botany and medicine
3. Relation of the plants of the Voynich Codex to period herbals of New Spain and
Mexico, as well as 16th to early seventeenth century herbals that describe plants
of the New World
Literature Cited
Amancio, D.R., E.G. Altmann, D. Rybski, O.N. Oliveira, and L. da F. Costa. 2013. Probing the
statistical properties of unknown texts: Application to the Voynich Manuscript. PLoS One 8 (7):
e67310. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0067310.
Brumbaugh, R.S. 1978. The most mysterious manuscript. Carbondale: Southern Illinois Press.
Casanova, A. 1999. Méthodes d’analyse du langage crypté: Une contribution à l’étude du manuscript du Voynich. Docteur thesis. Université de Paris. http://voynich.free.fr/a_casanova_
these_19mars1999.pdf. Accessed 18 Jan 2014.
Comegys, J.C. 2001. Keys for the Voynich scholar, 2006. Madera: Library of Congress.
Comegys, J.D. 2014 [2013]. The Voynich Manuscript: Aztec herbal from New Spain. [Unpublished
pdf file created March 22, 2014 but title page says ©2013]. http://voynichms.com/wp-content/
uploads/2014/03/VMSAztecHerbal-JDComegys.pdf. Accessed 23 Aug 2014.
Dakin, K. 1981. The characteristics of a Nahuatl lingua franca. In: Nahuatl studies in memory of
Fernando Horcasitas, ed. Frances Karttunen. Texas Linguistic Forum 18: 55–67.
Gravier, M.G. 2011. Sahagún’s Codex and book design in the indigenous context. In Colors
between two worlds. The Florentine Codex of Bernardino de Sahagún, ed. G.  Wolf and
J. Connors, 156–197. Milan: Officina Libraria.
Guy, J. 1991. Voynich revisited. Cryptologia 15: 161–166.
1 An Introduction to the Voynich Codex
11
Hirth, K.G. 2016. The Aztec economic world: Merchants and markets in ancient Mesoamerica.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Janick, J., and A.O. Tucker. 2017. Were Juan Gerson the illustrator and Gaspar de Torres the author
of the Voynich Codex? Notulae Botanicae Horti Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca 45 (2): 343–352.
Janick, J., and A.O. Tucker, eds. 2018. Unraveling the Voynich Codex. Cham: Springer Nature.
Montemurro, M.A., and D.H.  Zanette. 2013. Keywords and co-occurrence patterns in the
Voynich manuscript: An information-theoretic analysis. PLoS One 8 (6): e66344. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0066344.
O’Neill, H. 1944. Botanical observations on the Voynich MS. Speculum 19: 126.
Romero Ramírez, M.E. 2013. Limp, laced-case binding in parchment on sixteenth-century
Mexican printed books. Ph.D. Thesis. Vol. 2. London: Camberwell College of Arts, University
of the Arts.
Rugg, G. 2004a. The mystery of the Voynich Manuscript: New analysis of a famously cryptic
medieval document suggests that it contains nothing but gibberish. Scientific American 291
(1): 104–109.
Rugg, G. 2004b. An elegant hoax? A possible solution to the Voynich Manuscript. Cryptologia
28: 31–46.
Snijders, L., T. Zaman, and D. Howell. 2016. Using hyperspectral imaging to reveal a hidden precolonial Mesoamerican codex. Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports 9: 143–149.
Stolte, D. 2011. UA experts determine age of book ‘nobody can read’. https://uanews.arizona.edu/
story/ua-experts-determine-age-of-book-nobody-can-read. Accessed 13 Mar 2018.
Tucker, A.O., and R.H. Talbert. 2013. A preliminary analysis of the botany, zoology, and mineralogy
of the Voynich Manuscript. HerbalGram 100: 70–85.
Tucker, A.O., and J.  Janick. 2016. Identification of phytomorphs in the Voynich Codex.
Horticultural Reviews 44: 1–64.
Zandbergen, R. 2012. The Voynich manuscript. http://www.voynich.nu/index.html. Accessed 29
Dec 2012.
Literature Cited
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019 13
A. O. Tucker, J. Janick, Flora of the Voynich Codex,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19377-5_2
Chapter 2
Aztec Botany, Agriculture, Trade,
and Medicine
Mexico and the Aztec Empire
Mexico, a botanical paradise located in southern North America, is the third largest
country of Latin America and one-fifth the size of the United States. Mexico’s climate varies from temperate to tropical and from wetlands to desert. Mountain
ranges as high as 7000 feet are responsible for the huge variation in microclimates
and ecosystems.
With 23,324 native plant species, Mexico has the fourth largest floristic richness
in the world; its endemic species (50%) are surpassed only by South Africa
(Villaseñor 2016). Mexico is one of the centers of origin for many cultivated plants.
The native food crops include allspice, amaranth, avocado, cacao, chayote, chia
(Saliva hispanica), guava, chili pepper, lima bean, maize, papaya, Phaseolus beans,
pumpkin, sunflower, sweet potato, tomato, and vanilla. It is also the source for many
horticultural ornamentals, including cosmos, dahlia, frangipani, jacaranda, Jacobean
lily (Sprekelia), marigold, Mexican poppy (Argemone)¸ Mexican sunflower
(Tithonia), Laelia orchids, morning glory, sages, shell flower (Tigridia), tuberose,
and zinnia. The wide variety of plants in Mexico selected over several millennia
provides the knowledge base for the extensive medicinal lore of its indigenous
people.
The present population of about 123 million persons now constitutes the world’s
largest population of Spanish speakers, 80% of whom live in Mexico City. This
enormous city is located on the remains of the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan, centered
on Lake Texcoco, now drained. The Aztec empire (Fig. 2.1) extended to much of
Mesoamerica and touched the Gulf of Mexico and the Pacific Ocean (Moreira
2018). Tenochtitlan, the magnificent, sumptuous, island city known for its chinampas (“floating gardens”) was founded in 1325 and was destroyed by the conquistador Hernán Cortes in 1521 and decimated by diseases. The name Aztecs was coined
by Francisco Clavijero in 1780 (Clavijero and de Mora 1844) based on their legendary home, Aztlán, but they referred to themselves as Mexica, and this word is 
14
enshrined in the country’s present name. They were also known as Tenochca, the
people of Tenochtitlan. The Mexica spoke Nahuatl, part of the Uto-Aztecan language family group that extends from Oregon to Panama and still is spoken by more
than a million people. Many Nahuatl-derived words from Mexico now are common
in English, such as avocado, chili, chocolate, coyote, and tomato.
The Aztecs, latecomers to central Mexico, were the dominant rulers at the time
of the Spanish encounter with the New World. At the time of the conquest, the Aztec
population was estimated at about 11 million, but smallpox introduced by the
Spanish in 1519–1520 killed five to eight million people. Cocoliztli, probably an
indigenous hemorrhagic fever transmitted by rodent hosts and associated with a
bacterial pathogen, killed another seven million in the epidemics of 1545 and 1576
(Acuña-Soto et al. 2002; Vágene et al. 2018). The devastation brought about by a
combination of warfare and megadeath from introduced disease drastically reduced
their population, but the remnants of the Aztec population interbred with Spanish
conquistadors and immigrants, and their descendants now are an integral part of the
Mexican population.
The Aztecs were a complex, advanced civilization. They practiced a bewildering
state religion with stone pyramid temples and created a complex, interconnected
religious and secular calendar. Their art was sophisticated and included feather
weaving, painting, and sculpture, as well as illustrated codices. Priests and nobles
studied astronomy, for they believed cyclical phenomena of the sun, stars, and planets were linked to earthly events including the agricultural calendar and everimpending doom, ameliorated only by captive sacrifice. They utilized a logophonetic
writing system, yet in many ways they were a Stone Age culture lacking beasts of
burden and even the wheel.
Fig. 2.1 Aztec empire in 1521. (Source: The Harper Atlas of World History, rev. 1992)
2 Aztec Botany, Agriculture, Trade, and Medicine
15
Formed by a triple alliance between three city states (Tenochtitla, Texcoco, and
Tlacopan), the Aztec Empire was a tribute system organized into various ethnic
political units of city states (altepetl). At the time of the conquest, they were ruled
by an emperor king, Moctezuma II.  The Aztecs were militarily aggressive, with
hegemony over 450 city states that were mostly in Central Mexico but reached as far
as Guatemala. It was a trading society, with large markets carrying products from all
over the empire.
Trade
Marketplaces existed at every major city, but the largest was at Tlatelolco, the sister
city of Tenochititlan and not part of the Triple Alliance. However, this great market
declined during the sixteenth century, with the trade passing to Tenochititlan.
Anthony Pagden remarked on the letters of Cortés sent to the emperor: “A new
Indian market at San Hipólito came into being in the 1540s. Cervantes de Salazar
described it as a ‘square of such enormous size that it is wide enough for building a
city’. It was flanked by a Franciscan monastery—containing the Colegio de Santiago
de Tlatelolco—the residence of the Indian governor and an Indian prison. Cervantes
de Salazar estimated that the number of Indians using this market amounted of
twenty thousand or more.” (Cortés 1986:507). At Tenochititlan, Cortés noted in his
second letter to the emperor in 1519: “There are streets of herbalists where all the
medicines, herbs, and roots found in the land are sold. There are shops like apothecaries’, where they sell ready-made medicines as well as liquid ointments and
plasters.” (Cortés 1986:103). Native amatl (amate) and maguey fiber papers used
by Aztecs were available from paper vendors (amanamacac, amaoztomecatl) (Hirth
2016). Feldman (1978) provides a rather detailed map of a typical Mexica market,
while Durand-Forest (1971) provides a map of the market at Tenochtitlan (Fig. 2.2).
The herb seller was the quilnamacac, “a producer of herbs, a field worker, a
plucker of herbs.” (Sahagún 1961:92). The apothecary, the medicine collector, was
the pachichiuhqui (Molina 1571). The medicine dealer apothecary was the panamacac: “He sells all things, medicines, herbs, wood, stones, milk, alum…on a reed
mat” (Sahagún 1961:85–6). Hirth (2016:164) remarked, “Medicine was another
retail product. The apothecary (panamacac) sold a wide variety of herbal and natural remedies. These included fourteen kinds of different herbs together with types of
wood, stones, milk, and alum. While he may have collected some of these, it is more
likely that he relied on a selection of forager-collectors to provision him with a
number of natural remedies. Some of the concoctions sold were undoubtedly prepared by the apothecary himself since Sahagún [1961:86] indicates that he sold
things cooked in pots like skunk excretion. In this regard the medicine seller was
probably part retailer and part producer-seller.”
The herb sellers themselves were supplied by a special class of Aztec merchants
called the pochteca. This class, including both men and women and nobility and commoners, often provided military and political aid to the nobility. The naualoztomeca
Trade
16
of the pochteca were “disguised traders” who were multilingual and acted as spies.
The pochteca were wealthy and extremely secretive. Book 9 of Sahagún’s Florentine
Codex (Sahagún 1959) is devoted to these merchants. Their influence, and thus their
trading routes, extended throughout the southeastern and southwestern United States
to Georgia and Utah and as far south as the Andes in Peru (Berdan 1975, 1980, 1985,
1986, 1988; Nichols 2013; Oka and Kusimba 2008; Salomón 1978; Washburn et al.
2014; White and Weinstein 2008). In summary, the long-distance travels of the
pochteca imply that the herbs (and the knowledge of their uses) sold at the markets did
not have to come from Mexico alone but rather from the extent of the trading routes
of these merchants. This fact also has implications for the language of the Voynich
Codex, as the pochteca would have spoken a lingua franca based upon Nahuatl, such
as discovered by Dakin (1981), a Pidgin- or Creole-like language now extinct and
supplanted by Spanish.
Agriculture
Food production was vital in feeding the capital population and the one million
others who lived in the central basin. The chief foods were agave, amaranth, chia,
capsicum peppers, maize, and squash. The diverse agricultural production
Fig. 2.2 Reconstruction of a pre-Hispanic Aztec market. (Adapted from Feldman 1978)
2 Aztec Botany, Agriculture, Trade, and Medicine
17
The Parts of a Mexica Market1
Section I: Restaurants, Produce, Meat, and Fish
l., 2. Tlaxcalnamacac: The Tortilla Seller
3. Aioachnamacac: The Seller of Gourd Seeds and cakes of gourd seeds
4. Tlaquetzalnamacac: One who provides people with the chocolate drink of
the rulers, of the nobles
5., 6. Tlaxcalnamacac: see above No. 1
7. Atolnamacac: The Atole Seller, sells hot atole drink
8. Cacaoanamac: The Cacao Seller, sells cacao beans
9. Totoltenamac: The Egg Seller
10. Picienamacac: The Seller of Fine Tobacco
11. Chiennamacac: The Chía Seller; The Oil Seller
12. Henamac: The Bean Seller
13. Totolnamacac: The Turkey Seller
14. Vauhnamacac: The Amaranth Seed Seller
15. Tlaolnamacac: The Seller of Maize Grains
16. Chiquippantlacatl: The Displayer of Wares on a Large Basket, the seller
of colors, of various colors, of dyes
17. Nacanamacac: The Meat Seller
18., 19. Xoquilacanamacac: The Stench Seller (Fish Seller)
20. Tochominamacac: The Seller of Rabbit Hair
Section II: Meat and Produce
21. Nacanamacac: see above No. 17
22., 23. Suchiqualpantlacatl: The Man with Fruit; seller of maize stalks, green
maize, tortillas, cooked gourds, tree fruit, cactus fruit, sweet potatoes, manioc
24. (thread)
25. Nacanamacac: see above No. 17
26., 27. Suchiqualpantlacatl: see above No. 22
28. (thread)
Section III: Hardware, Hides, Pharmacy, and Wine
29. Ocnamacac: Wine or Pulque Seller
30. Amolnamacac: Soap Seller
31. Quinamaca Cuetlascactli: Seller of Cured Leather Sandals
32. (rope)
33. Quilnamac: Herb Seller
34. Hihujnamacac: Feather Seller; the Spinner of Feathers into Thread
35. Euanamacac: Hide Seller (based upon Nahua rules of compound word
construction)
36. Siuhquilnamac: Turquoise Herb Seller; sells black clay mixed with
uixachin leaves for coloring things
1Unless otherwise stated, all Nahua terms are from Sahagún (1961).
(continued)
Agriculture
18
37. Panamacac: The Medicine Seller; sells medicines of herbs, wood, stones,
milk, alum, and things cooked in ollas
38. Tzacunamacac: The Glue Seller
39. Suchiocutzonamacac: The Seller of Liquidambar; sells pine resin, possessor of pine resin trees
40. Acaquauhnamacac: The Smoking Tube Seller
41. Ocutzonamac: The Seller of Pine Resin; sells pine and other resin, a
woodsman, a collector of pine resin
42. Poponamacac: The Broom Seller
43. Vitzmallonamac: The Needle Seller; sells needles, awls, punches, bells,
axes, adzes, fish hooks, chisels
44. Olnamacac: The Rubber Seller
45. (cochineal)
46. not known
47. Pinolnamacac: The Pinole Seller (based upon Durand-Forest 1971)
48. not known
Section IV: Cloth, Minerals, Produce, and Services
49. Tequixquinamacac: The Seller of Saltpeter
50. Tizanamacac: The Chalk Seller
51. Monamacac: Self Seller (prostitute)
52. Tomanamacac: The Tomato Seller
53. Chilnamacac: The Chile Seller
54. Chientzotzolnamacac: Wrinkled Chia Seller
55., 56. Iczotilmanamac: The Seller of Palm Leaf Fiber Capes
57., 58. Veicapantlacatl: “The Principal Merchant;” sells worked capes,
worked shifts, fine skirts
Section V: Maguey Goods and Building Material
59. Necunamacac: The Maguey Syrup Seller
60. Aianamacac: The Seller of Coarse Maguey Fiber Capes
61. (hats)
62. Cacnamacac: The Sandal Seller; sells sandals of maguey fiber
63. (hats)
64. Cacnamacac: see above No. 62
65. Xiquipilnamacac: The Bag Seller
66. Neilpilonamocac: The Sash Seller; sells narrow strips of cloth
67. Quauhnanamaca: The Wood Seller; sells lumber
68. Quruhxinquil “The Carpenter:” sells beams, wooden pillars, lintels, roofing,
wooden columns, boards, planks
69. Tenexnamacac: Seller of Lime; adjacent to seller of building stone
70. Quathnanamaca: see above No. 67
71. Quauhxinqui: see above No. 68
72. Tenexnamacac: see above No. 69
(continued)
2 Aztec Botany, Agriculture, Trade, and Medicine
19
Section VI: Produce, Salt, Cloth, and Money
73. not known
74. Chilnamacac: see above No. 53
75. Iztanannacau: The Seller of Salt; sells salt balls and salt ollas
76. (pieces of cueitl or skirt cloth sold) (Durand-Forest 1971)
77. (pieces of tilmatli or manta cloth sold) (Durand-Forest 1971)
78. (selling of gold-filled quills)
79. (ocotl torches sold) (Durand-Forest 1971)
80.–82. Tilmapan Tlacatl, Quachnamacac: The Man With the Capes, The Seller
of Large Cotton Capes
83. (seller of tomitilmatli or woolen mantas) (Durand-Forest 1971)
Section VII: High-Value Goods
84. Tilmapan Tlacatl, Quachnamacac: see above No. 80
85. Xicalnamacac: The Seller of Gourd Bowls
86. Tlapitzalnamacac: The Seller of Cast Metal Objects; sells objects made
out of precious metal, either gold or silver
87. Ilruinamacac: The Feather Seller
88. Tecoani: The Slave Dealer
89. Amanamacac: The Paper Seller
90. Chalchiuhnamacac: The Seller of Green Stones
91. (sellers of bees’ honey)
Section VIII: Woven Goods, Pots, Trinkets, and Services
92., 93. Chiquiuhnamacac: The Seller of Large Baskets
94. Cozcatetecpanqui: The Displayer of Necklaces
95. Zoquichiahqui: The Clay Worker; sells all pottery except griddles
96. Comalnamacac: The Comal Seller
97., 98. Chiquiuhnamacac: see above No. 92
99. not known
100. Tananamacac: The Seller of Small Baskets
101. (sellers of bird skins)
102. (sellers of shells)
103. Tezcanamacac: The Mirror-Stone Seller
104. Petlanamacac: The Reed Mat Seller
105. (barbers)
106. ltznamacac: The Obsidian Seller; sells blades on demand
107. Otlachiquiuhnamacac: The Seller of Stout Cane Carrying Baskets
108. Petlanamacac: see above No. 104
109.–112. Not known
Section IX: Structural Features
A. Stage
B. Court House
C. Entrance to the Courts of the Great Temple
D. Arcades
Agriculture
20
included chinampa, artificial gardens based on layered soil and organic matter on
lake shores; tlacolol, a slash-and-burn system based on rotating crops along foothills; terrace farming on hills; and complex irrigation along river beds (Carmack
et al. 2006:91). Chinampas would produce crops some seven times a year and
provided 50% of the dietary needs of Tenochtitlan. The rest were provided via
tributes from the provinces. Protein was supplemented mainly by turkeys, domesticated dogs, and game meat (such as tapir, deer, rabbit, and peccary, a New World
pig). Secondary food sources were locusts, fish, crustaceans, water birds, grubs,
and land lizards (Harris 1998:230). The noble class ate the flesh of victims of
human sacrifice.
Medical Knowledge
Aztec medicine involved a variety of curing techniques from religious rituals to
herbal remedies (von Hagen 1961:109–14; Aguilar-Moreno 2007:359; Schendel
et al. 2014). Two types of doctors existed: the tepati, who used herbal medicine, and
the ticitl, the sorcerers (Schendel et al. 2014).
Aztecs used and named hundreds of herbs, many shown to have pharmaceutical
value (Appendix A). The medical knowledge of the Aztecs so impressed the Spanish
rulers that they sent emissaries to New Spain to study the herbs, stones, trees, and
roots used by Aztec physicians (Schendel et  al. 2014). Francisco Hernández, a
Spanish naturalist and court physician to Phillip II, was appointed “General protomedico of our Indies, islands and mainland of the Ocean Sea” in 1570 and was sent
on a seminal scientific expedition to the New World to study medicinal plants. He
visited Aztec botanical gardens.
Botanical Gardens
Although Mexicans were associated with gruesome rituals and warfare, they also
were pioneering horticulturists and lovers of aesthetics long before their encounter with Spain. In 1457, a massive garden named Texcotzingo was constructed on
a hill by the ruler Nezahualcoyotl, the ruler (tlatoani) of Texcoco, who also was
responsible for the garden retreat at Chapultepec. Texcotzingo was more than just
a botanical garden cultivating various flora from the empire; it represented a map
of the political domain and was a hydrological engineering accomplishment. It
contained paths, bas relief sculptures, and shrines. Aqueducts transferred water
from Mount Tlaloc into pools and irrigations systems. Waterfalls, fountains, and
baths adorned the park. Because of their southwestern placement and the mist
produced from pools, certain sectors created an adequate micro-environment to
grow tropical plants at high altitudes. The glories of Nezahualcotyl’s garden were
extolled by Granziera (2001):
2 Aztec Botany, Agriculture, Trade, and Medicine
21
Nezahualcoyotl also laid out his garden on the sacred hill of Tezcotzinco and used the
canalized waters flowing down from the springs of Mount Tlaloc to create ponds with panoramic views from the hillside. The hilltop was defined by a spiralling [sic] path reached by
rock-cut stairs rising from the probable site of Nezahualcoyotl’s villa on the southern slope
below. Another path traverses the hill along the east-west axis. There were baths and pools
placed at the cardinal points around the circumambulating path. On the summit were found
the remains of a Tlaloc shrine. Below, to the east, monumental sculptures were dedicated to
agricultural divinities. Other natural shrines in Tezcozinco include a cave at the transitionpoint between Nezahualcoyotl’s residence and the botanical collections on the lower south
slope of the hill.
This garden was occupied in the 1520s for 3 years by Pedro de Gante, one of the
12 priests who accompanied Cortés. Aztec botanic gardens such as Nezahualcoyotl
facilitated the acquisition of fresh herbs, dried herbs, ointments, salves, wood,
stones, sap, roots, and leaves for apothecaries and doctors, so they were readily
available in the extensive market at Tlatelolco.
The glories of Nezahualcoyotl’s garden can be found in the writings of his great
grandson, Juan Bautista de Pomar, who claimed rights to the legacy of the palace
with extensive water features, botanic gardens, and extensive baths (Douglas
2010; García Icazbalceta and Pomar 1891; Granziera 2001). In 1592, Pomar wrote
Relación de Tezcoco, an account of the Aztecs and Tlatelolcas that included a discussion of Aztec foodstuffs, animals, trees, shrubs, and herbs and their medicinal
uses, with Nahuatl names, and mentions familiarity with Francisco Hernández,
chief physician to Phillip II. Pomar is also credited with one of the most important
compilations of poetry, Romances de los señores de Nueva España.
Status rivalry among Aztec rulers was not limited to conquest, but also to beauty.
In response to Nezahualcoyotl’s creation, Moctezuma I reconstructed the ancient
Huaxtepec, a semitropical botanical garden. It was a large, orderly garden of six
miles circumference, constructed at a much lower altitude and hydraulically fed by
a crossing river. The garden was filled with ornamental, aromatic, and medicinal
plants, with coastal imports such as vanilla, cacao, and magnolia trees. According to
the conquistador Díaz del Castillo, it was the best garden he and Cortés had seen.
It served as a place of visual and olfactory pleasure. Recreational gardens and nurseries were commonplace in the Aztec world. Some served purely for pleasure, and
nurseries supplied seeds and tree saplings for parks, as well as flowers and greens to
decorate temples, which could be sold at central markets. The value placed on beautiful plants was so extreme that commoners were banned by decree from planting
some of them (Evans 2004:477).
The comprehensive botanical gardens of the Aztecs in Tenochtitlan, and
Chapultepec later inspired those in Europe. Some in Mexico included water features
for ritualistic bathing combined with sweat lodges (temezcalli) or sweatbaths
(Nuttall 1925; Granziera 2001, 2005). The large gardens of Moctezuma within
Tenochtitlan and the gardens of the nobility elsewhere contained plants and herbs
from many parts of Mexico. These extensive gardens indicate the wide knowledge
and resources of native plants. The flower pleasure gardens of Moctezuma did not
Agriculture
22
Fig. 2.3 Torching of
books by Spanish friars at
Tlaxcala. (Image from
Diego Muñoz Camargo,
Descripción de la ciudad y
provincia de Tlaxcala,
Glasgow University
Library, MS Hunter 242,
folio 242r, courtesy of the
Special Collections
Department, Library,
University of Glasgow)
contain food plants; the plants were solely for his personal enjoyment. Cortés
specifically referred to the beautiful gardens of Moctezuma II, which contained
channels for irrigation.
Conclusions
The diverse flora of Mexico and the great interest by the Aztecs in plants and gardens represent a rich source of botanical and historical information that has been
neglected. Although Aztec botanical knowledge has been lost due to the decimation of Aztec culture and the destruction of their pre-Columbian codices (Fig. 2.3),
their knowledge can be reconstructed based on sixteenth century works of New
Spain in which indigenous Nahuans participated, and on European herbals as discussed in subsequent chapters. Identification of 131 images of plants from the
Herbal section of the Voynich Codex and 41 plants from the Pharmaceutical section
is the subject of Chap. 4. Chapter 5 analyzes which plants are common between
these sources, and especially which plants of the Voynich Codex are duplicated.
The results confirm that the Voynich Codex is a sixteenth century work based on
flora known and named in Aztec culture.
2 Aztec Botany, Agriculture, Trade, and Medicine
23
Literature Cited
Acuña-Soto, R., D.W. Stahle, M.K. Cleaveland, and M.D. Therrell. 2002. Megadrought and megadeath in 16th Century Mexico. Emerging Infectious Diseases 8: 360–362.
Aguilar-Moreno, M. 2007. Handbook to life in the Aztec world. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Berdan, F.F. 1975. Trade, tribute, and market in the Aztec empire. Ph.D. Thesis. Department of
Anthropology. Austin: University of Texas.
Berdan, F.F. 1980. Aztec merchants and markets: Local-level economic activity in a non-industrial
empire. Mexicon 2: 37–41.
Berdan, F.F. 1985. Markets in the economy of Aztec Mexico. In Markets and marketing.
Monographs in Economic Anthropology, ed. S. Plattner, vol. 4, 339–367. Lanham: University
Press of America.
Berdan, F.F. 1986. Enterprise and empire in Aztec and Early Colonial Mexico. In Economic
aspects of Prehispanic Highland Mexico. Research in Economic Anthropology, Supplement,
ed. B.L. Isaac, vol. 2, 281–302. Greenwich: JAI Press.
Berdan, F.F. 1988. Principles of regional and long-distance trade in the Aztec empire. In Smoke
and mist: Mesoamerican studies in memory of Thelma D.  Sullivan, ed. J.K.  Josserand and
K. Dakin, 639–656. Oxford: BAR International Series.
Carmack, R., J.L. Gasco, and G.H. Gossen. 2006. The legacy of Mesoamerica: History and culture
of a Native American civilization. 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall.
Clavijero, F., and J.  Joaquin de Mora. 1844. Historia antigua de México y de su Conquista.
México: Lara.
Cortés, H. 1986. Letters from Mexico. Trans. and ed. A. Pagden, introd. J. H. Elliott. New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Dakin, K. 1981. The characteristics of a Nahuatl lingua franca. In Nahuatl studies in memory of
Fernando Horcasitas, ed. F. Karttunen and Texas Linguistic Forum, vol. 18, 55–67.
Douglas, E. de J. 2010. In the Palace of Nezahualcoyotl: Painting manuscripts, writing the
pre-Hispanic past in colonial period. Tetzcoco, Mexico. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Durand-Forest, J. 1971. Cambios económicos y moneda entre los Aztecas. Estudio de la Cultura
Náhuatl (México: UNAM Instituto de Investigaciones Históricas) 9: 105–124.
Evans, S.T. 2004. Aztec palaces. In Palaces of the ancient New World, ed. S.T.  Evans and
J. Pillsbury, 7–58. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection.
Feldman, L.H. 1978. Inside a Mexican market. In Mesoamerican communication routes and cultural contacts. New World Archeological Foundation, ed. T.A. Lee and C. Navarette, 219–222.
Provo: Brigham Young University.
García Icazbalceta, J., and J.B. Pomar. 1891. Pomar y Zurita: Pomar, Relación de Tezcoco; Zurita,
Breve relación de los señores de la Nueva España. Varias relaciones antiguas. (Siglo XVI).
México: Francisco Diaz de Leon.
Granziera, P. 2001. Concept of the garden in pre-Hispanic Mexico. Garden History 29: 185–213.
Granziera, P. 2005. Huaxtepec: The sacred garden of an Aztec emperor. Landscape Research 30:
81–107.
Harris, M. 1998. Good to eat: Riddles of food and culture. Long Grove: Waveland Press, Inc.
Hirth, K.G. 2016. The Aztec economic world: Merchants and markets in ancient Mesoamerica.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Molina, A. de. 1571. Vocabulario en lengua mexicana y castellana. Mexico: Casa de Antonio de
Spinosa.
Moreira, F. 2018. An historical context for the Voynich Codex: Aztec Mexico and Catholic Spain.
Chapter 3. In Unraveling the Voynich Codex: a 16th century Mexican manuscript, ed. J. Janick
and A.O. Tucker. Cham: Springer Nature.
Nichols, D.L. 2013. Merchants and merchandise: The archaeology of Aztec commerce at Otumba,
Mexico. In Merchants, markets, and exchange in the pre-Columbian world, ed. K.G. Hirth and
J. Pillsbury, 49–63. Washington, DC: Dumbarton Oaks Research.
Literature Cited
24
Nuttall, Z. 1925. The gardens of ancient Mexico. Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution
1923: 453–464.
Oka, R., and C.M. Kusimba. 2008. The archaeology of trading systems, Part 1: Towards a new
trade synthesis. Journal of Archaeological Research 16: 339–395.
Sahagún, B. de. 1959. Florentine Codex. General history of the things of New Spain. Book 9 – The
merchants. Trans. C. E. Dibble and A. J. A. Anderson. Salt Lake City, Utah; University of Utah
Press.
Sahagún, B. de. 1961. Florentine Codex. General history of the things of New Spain. Book 10 – The
people. Trans. C. E. Dibble and A. J. A. Anderson. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Salomón, F. 1978. Pochteca and mindalá: a comparison of long-distance traders in Ecuador and
Mesoamerica. Journal of the Steward Anthropological Society 9: 231–246.
Schendel, G., J. Amézquita, and M.E. Bustamante. 2014. Medicine in Mexico: From Aztec herbs
to betatrons. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Vágene, A.J., A. Herbig, M.G. Campana, N.M. Roblers Garcia, C. Warinner, S. Sabin, M.A. Spyrou,
A. Andrades Vatueña, D. Huson, N. Tuross, K.I. Bos, and J. Krause. 2018. Salmonella enterica
genomes from victims of a major sixteenth-century epidemic in Mexico. Native Ecology Evolution
2 (3): 520–528.
Villaseñor, J.L. 2016. Checklist of the native vascular plants of Mexico. Revista Mexicana de
Biodiversidad 87: 559–902.
von Hagen, V.W. 1961. The ancient sun kingdoms of the Americas. New  York: The World
Publishing Company.
Washburn, D.K., W.N. Washburn, P.A. Shipkovaand, and M.A. Pelleymounter. 2014. Chemical
analysis of cacao residues in archaeological ceramics from North America: considerations of
contamination, sample size and systematic controls. Journal of Archaeological Science 50:
191–207.
White, N.M., and R.A. Weinstein. 2008. The Mexican connection and the far west of the U.S.
Southeast. American Antiquity 73: 227–278.
2 Aztec Botany, Agriculture, Trade, and Medicine
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019 25
A. O. Tucker, J. Janick, Flora of the Voynich Codex,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19377-5_3
Chapter 3
Iconography and Phytomorphic
Identification
Introduction and Historical Context
The Voynich Codex, discovered in 1912 by Wilfred M. Voynich in Italy, had been
long assumed to be of pre-Columbian European origin. This conventional dogma
was put into question in 1944 by the distinguished botanist Rev. Dr. Hugh O’Neill,
who identified in it two New World plants, sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) and
capsicum pepper (Capsicum annuum L). Despite his credentials as a botanical taxonomist and an expert in Mesoamerican plants, his work was either ignored or ridiculed. In 1991, an obscure note by an Australian, Jacques B.M. Guy, confirmed the
sunflower identification and noted not a single European species. He mentioned that
a botanical colleague identified passionfruit. Tucker and Talbert, in a seminal paper
(2013), extended the identification to 39 plants as either indigenous to the New
World or circumboreal, such as Actaea rubra (Aiton) Willd. Tucker and Janick
(2017) extended the list to 55 species while Tucker and Janick (2018a) added two
additional ones. The identification in the Voynich Codex of New World plants as
well as a mineral and 21 animals (Flaherty et al. 2018) provides hard evidence that
the Voynich Codex is post-Columbus and not a fifteenth century European work, as
had been almost universally assumed by Voynich Codex researchers (Zanbergen
2004–2017).
Thus far, all of the species identified are from the New World, with a recent range
from Texas to California, south to Nicaragua. Yet, despite these identifications by
professional biologists in three refereed scientific publications and a book from a
major publisher, some individuals still insist on a pre-Columbian European origin.
In the present work, identification of phytomorphs in the Voynich Codex is extended
to 129 of 131 phytomorphs (98.5%) in the Herbal section plus 41 of 228 phytomorphs (18.0%) in the Pharmaceutical section.
Eurocentric bias may be one explanation for insisting that the provenance of the
Voynich Codex is from the Old World, not the New. In her comprehensive review of
herbals, Agnes Arber (1970) mentioned the Codex Cruz-Badianus in two sentences 
26
and Hernandez in one sentence; Sahagún’s Florentine Codex is not mentioned, nor
is it included in a chronology of herbals. Wilfrid Blunt (1971) essentially followed
suit, though in 1979 Blunt and Sandra Raphael provided an appropriate discussion
of the Codex Cruz-Badianus. Minta Collins (2000) was even more dismissive of
New World materials, not mentioning them at all. Only Frank Anderson (1977)
devoted a chapter to Hernandez. Eurocentric bias is further shown by the claim that
the first botanic garden in the world was at Padua, Italy, in 1545 (Angarano et al.
2017), completely ignoring the many botanic gardens of the Nahua reported by
Hernan Cortés when he entered Mexico in 1519 (Evans 2000, 2005, 2010; Granziera
2001, 2005; Nuttall 1925). Did the Nahua also have nascent herbaria? Arber (1970)
claimed that the first herbarium specimen was created by Luca Ghini at Bologna,
Italy, prior to 1551, possibly as early as 1532, but the “maguoey” as #4 on fol. 100r
of the Voynich Codex is obviously bent as a dried, pressed specimen (see Fig. 3.2).
Aztec palaces were centers of learning, unlike European palaces, whose elite
were often uneducated and unbathed. Today, we have only hints of Aztec and Mayan
botanical triumphs because their libraries, often on native amate paper, were burnt
in a kind of auto-da-fé as “heathen” by the Spanish priests (see Fig. 2.3). In addition, book burnings by conquerors who rewrote history were routine (Binnqüist
2003; Binnqüist et al. 2012; Marcus 1992; Polastron 2007; von Hagen 1944).
Guidelines for Plant Identification
The appropriate guidelines for identifying phytomorphs were outlined by Tucker
and Janick (2017):
1. For any identification of a plant, the strength of evidence depends on the
qualifications of the identifier(s).
2. Identification of plants, just as with forensic identification of faces or fingerprints, requires pattern recognition. For botanical subjects, this requires recognition of the appropriate plant family, then to genus, and eventually species.
Amateurs of botanical identification often reverse this process and try to identify the species first and ignore the patterns of the plant family, usually leading
to false identifications.
3. Any attempt at identification must use currently accepted scientific names and
the appropriate vocabulary of terms pertinent to plant taxonomy.
4. Details of habitat or ecological association may provide evidence to support an
identification of a phytomorph.
5. Associated names often provide supporting evidence for the identification of a
phytomorph.
6. Because of inherent biological variability of plants and differing talents of the
artist(s), no identification of a phytomorph can be considered absolute. Rather,
degrees of accuracy must be stated, from high to low. Confidence is based upon
high percentages of match with a list of features that agree or do not agree with
the identification.
3 Iconography and Phytomorphic Identification
27
7. All previous attempts at identification from books and refereed publications
must be presented and discussed as to accuracy. Similar representations of phytomorphs in other original sources should be cited to bolster the identification,
along with any ethnobotanical uses or mythology.
8. Identifications of phytomorphs in a transcultural society such as sixteenth century New Spain, pre- and post-Conquest, must consider artistic methods of
representation.
9. Pigments (even mineral pigments in European paintings) vary in stability, and
the transient nature of vegetable-derived pigments in New World paintings
means that the colors seen today may not be the same colors as originally
applied.
10. The purpose and background of the portrayal must be considered. Is any
mythology associated with it? Are certain diagnostic characteristics emphasized for identification?
11. Any identifications from restored materials should be not be considered as
absolute because of past practices with little or no record of the degree of restoration. In the past, some restorations had more in common with forgery,
employing identical or similar techniques, along with pigments and pigment
binders, used by restorers with questionable ability, who sometimes even distressed the restoration to agree with the rest of the work.
Iconographic Techniques
The Voynich Codex utilizes a number of uncommon iconographic techniques, many
of which are unique:
1. A limited palette (Fig. 3.1). The small number of pigments available to the artist
for the Voynich Codex has been previously mentioned (Tucker and Janick 2016).
For example, one blue pigment as used for all the tones and shades from blue to
purple, such as lilac or lavender.
2. A flat, two-dimensional representation of plants reminiscent of pressed specimens (Fig. 3.2).
3. A foreshortening of large plants, in which young shoots appear “grafted” or
inserted upon an older base (Fig. 3.3).
4. Root fantasies in the shape of animals and human faces (Fig. 3.4).
5. Reptiles and amphibians among leaves and roots (Fig. 3.5).
6. Enlarged organs out of proportion to the rest of the plant (Fig. 3.6).
7. A mixture of accurate botanical details versus crude representations (Fig. 3.7).
8. Reconstruction of plants apparently from dried, fragmented samples (Fig. 3.8).
The curanderos/curanderas today deal mostly with long-lasting dried herbs, so
this is not a surprise (notably Torres n.d. a, b; 2006; Torres and Sawyer 2005).
As a previous example, fol. 94r matches the repent (creeping) form of
Duranta erecta L. (D. repens L.) (Fig. 3.8). The fruit should be golden yellow in
Iconographic Techniques
28
Fig. 3.1 Red-brown, blue, and green pigments in Voynich Codex phytomorphs: (a) Smallanthus
sp., folio 40v; (b) apothecary jar folio 101r#2
Fig. 3.2 A flat, twodimensional representation
of Agave atrovirens, folio
100r #4, which appears as
a pressed specimen
3 Iconography and Phytomorphic Identification
29
a panicle when fresh, but drying of this species, especially with heat, turns the
fruit black, and they often fragment. The painter then re-assembled them into a
cyme (Tucker and Janick 2016). Latin American grocers still carry lines of dried
medicinal herbs, such as the gordolobo (Pseudognaphalium spp.) (Fig. 3.9).
Fig. 3.3 Phytomorphs with apparent insertion of shoots on rootstocks: (a) Ribes malvaceum, folio
23r; (b) Salvia cacaliifoia, folio 45r
Fig. 3.4 Root fantasies with animal shapes and human faces: (a) Animal-like roots. (b) Faces
in roots
Iconographic Techniques
30
9. Combination of species into a “hybrid” phytomorph (Fig.  3.10). Most of the
phytomorphs in the Voynich Codex consist of only one species. For example, fol.
9v is Viola bicolor in both flowers and foliage. Hybrid phytomorphs represent at
least two different species united into one, similar to Fol.33v, which may be
Psacalium sp.? with Pippenalia sp.? We propose that the artist drew these hybrid
phytomorphs when confronted with a mixture of dried specimens, and created
artificial devices (like the cupule in Fol. 15v, a morphological component that
has not existed since the pteridosperms). Those who need convincing of the
concept of hybrid phytomorphs need only to examine fol. 90r, where a flower
has been grafted onto a fern. These hybrid phytomorphs then consist of two
species that are used in combination rather than alone. The concept of mixtures
of herbs to cure a particular problem is ingrained in the curanderos/curanderas,
as exemplified by the herbal remedies from present-day Mexican markets seen
in Fig. 3.9b.
The concept of hybrid phytomorphs in the Voynich Codex was first elucidated by
Elizebeth Smith Friedman in 1962. In a newspaper article, she wrote: “The root
system belongs to one plant, the stem system to another, the leaves and flowers to
still others.” We cannot document three species in one hybrid phytomorph, but we
Fig. 3.5 Animals associated with phytomorphs: (a) Mexican horned lizard probably eating insects
from Dudleya ingens, folio 25v. (b) Caecilians, legless amphibians, intertwined in roots of
Lithophramga affine, folio 49r
3 Iconography and Phytomorphic Identification
31
do document two species. Recognition of hybrid phytomorphs is of particular
importance and is unique to the Voynich Codex. Perhaps this was a way to indicate
the powerful effect of combinations of two herbs versus single herbs, or combinations of many herbs in the Pharmaceutical section.
Geographic Range
Previous research (Tucker and Talbert 2013; Tucker and Janick 2018; Janick and
Tucker 2018) has shown a range of potential plants from Texas to California,
south to Nicaragua. Thus, matches to the phytomorphs were sought from species
in this geographical area. Some of the potential identifications are relatively accurate because the phytomorphs include diagnostic characters, such as Brasenia
schreberi on Fol. 49v. Others, because the phytomorphs are crude or seem to have
been “re-created,” are guesses. The latter are indicated by “cf.” (“compares favorably”) or “?.” This publication includes only some of the abbreviated phytomorphs
of the roots and leaves in the Pharmaceutical section, which are restricted in many
Fig. 3.6 Enlarged organs
in phytomorphs of Cirsium
sp., folio 50r. See also
Fig. 3.1
Geographic Range
32
cases to only roots, leaves, or shoots. Many of these phytomorphs will probably
remain unidentified forever unless somebody can make lucky guesses from the
names, because many of the phytomorphs in this section are labeled with Voynichese
symbols (Fig. 1.2).
Plant Uses
Identification of phytomorphs in the Voynich Codex shows mostly medicinals, but
there are also food, ornamental, and industrial plants. One would have expected
maize to be included, since it was so important to the culture of the indigenous
Fig. 3.7 Accurate drawing of phytomorph: (a) Viola bicolor, folio 9v, versus stylized drawing (b)
Eryngium sp., folio 16v
3 Iconography and Phytomorphic Identification
33
Fig. 3.8 Phytomorph of Duranta erecta, folio 94r, probably from a dried sample, based on black
fruit color
Fig. 3.9 Dried mixtures of herbs in Mexico: (a) Gordolobo is a dried mixture of Pseudognaphalium
spp. that have been used for centuries in Mexico as expectorants. (Source: http://www.papajimsbotanica.com/product_info.php/products_id/2548); (b) Mixtures of herbs found in present-day
Mexican markets. (Source: http://www.mexicolore.co.uk/images-3/396_17_2.jpg)
Plant Uses
34
population, but its lack may be explained by the 14 missing folios (28 pages) of the
Herbal section. However, the Pharmaceutical section includes an image of a Zea sp.,
probably teosinte, considered a parent of maize (Fig. 4.124).
References to medicinal plants of Mexico seem obvious (e.g., Martinez 1969)
because of the widespread use of these plants in the ancient Aztec empire, but we
included references to the medicinal plants of the West Indies (e.g., Asprey and
Thornton 1953, 1954; Ayensu 1981). The putative author, Gaspar de Torres, was
born in Santo Domingo, and some Taino names have been noted in the text (Tucker
and Janick 2018a, Chap. 4). Undoubtedly Torres searched for “botanical cognates”
in Mexico from his previous experience in Santo Domingo, much as the Spanish
substituted local species for oregano, garlic, bay laurel, cinnamon, and other herbs
and spices in the New World. Because the range of these plants includes what is now
known as the United States of America, Moerman’s 1998 work on Native American
medicinal plants is also cited.
Fig. 3.10 Hybrid phytomorphs: (a) folio 33v, Psacalium sp. + Pippenalia sp.? (see Fig. 4.150);
(b) folio 90r, Osmunda regalis var. spectabilis + Vernonia sp. (see Fig. 4.161)
3 Iconography and Phytomorphic Identification
35
Sources and Techniques
The present publication extends the 55 plant species to ca. 168, and the 34 families
to 64 in the following chapter. All of the plants, except for the introduced weedy
salsify, Tragopogon porrifolius, and a montane species, Oclemena acuminata, are
native from the southeastern United States to California, and south to Nicaragua.
Herbs from outside central Mexico could have been at one of the Nahua botanic
gardens (which were established prior to European botanic gardens) or, more likely,
were traded as dried samples in the vast trading networks. This publication also
identifies a major psychoactive plant of the New World, Nymphaea ampla. A number of these species also occur in the West Indies with medicinal uses.
The species overlap with other herbals of this period, such as the Codex CruzBadianus, Hernández’ botanical texts, Sahagún’s Florentine Codex, and Gerard’s
Herball, will be discussed in Chap. 5. Common themes among the medicinal uses
quoted are reproductive problems (especially female problems, such as menstruation, breastfeeding, contraception, delivery), colds, diarrhea, and skin problems.
The Nahua marketplace was dominated by women (Truitt 2018); this implies that
not only were the herbs sold by women but the knowledge of their use was also
transmitted by women. Women’s problems were solely handled by women (Farfán
and Elferink 2010), and we thus have almost no record of the herbs used for these
medical conditions, because chroniclers were exclusively men. The idea that this
could be a women’s herbal, at least in part, was first promulgated by L. C. Strong
and E. L. McCawley in 1947. It is intriguing that the very first word in the Voynich
Codex is pachys, which is transliterated as huomin, pronounced “women.”
The Mexican and European influences on Gaspar de Torres are obvious, but what
about his formative years in Santo Domingo? In the mid-1500s, Bartolomé de las
Casas, a Dominican friar, reported three mutually unintelligible Arawak-derived
languages in Hispaniola (a common language, Macorix, and Ciguayo); he also indicated what we call “Taino” was a lingua franca understood throughout Hispaniola
(Granberry and Vesceloius 2004). Conventional historians tell us that the Taíno are
extinct, but modern DNA evidence shows us that some populations survived in
remote areas not affected by disease or Spanish enslavement. And not only did the
Taíno survive, but so did their cultural heritage. The medicinal practice called Agua
Dulce emphasizes women, bathing, four directions, and herbs (Baracutei Estevez
2008, 2016, 2018; González 2018; Schroeder et al. 2018; Wade 2018; Woodaman
2017), all in common with the Voynich Codex.
Nahuatl Plant Names
The names of the plants in the Herbal section of the Voynich Codex have not been
located in the text, but 188 of the 228 plants in the Pharmaceutical section are
labeled and transliterated (Tucker and Janick 2018b, Chap. 5). Nahuatl names for
plants are typically of four types (Clayton et al. 2009):
Nahuatl Plant Names
36
1. Primary “folk-generic” names that cannot at present be analyzed but which are
likely to have been known widely and to be present as cognates in the modern
Nahua languages. One example from the Voynich Codex would be nochtli, or the
phonetic orthographic variant nāshti.
2. Compound “folk generic” names
3. “Folk-specific” names composed of a generic term plus a qualifying epithet
(which may be compounded into the name), a class less likely to be widespread
4. “Descriptive phases” that may have been coined by Gaspar de Torres himself and
“which are least likely to have been shared widely and to have been reserved in
contemporary languages.” An example from the Voynich Codex would be
māncuānaca or its phonetic orthographic variant māncuonoca, perhaps derived
from mano (hand in Spanish) plus cuānaca (chicken foot in Nahuatl). Indeed, the
phytomorph root in folio 100v#13 does resemble a chicken foot.
The names of the phytomorphs in the Voynich Codex are also in other nearby
languages, such as the Taino maguey, or its phonetic orthographic variant māgueoy
(fol. 100r#1). This is in addition to liberal use of Spanish, such as ahumi, or I smoke
(fol. 100v(2)#6).
The names attached to the phytomorphs in the Voynich Codex in symbols typical
to shorthand of sixteenth century Spanish correspondence (Janick and Tucker 2018),
represent a private, personal phonetic spelling of the languages heard by Gasper de
Torres in a Spanish alphabet (which notably lacks a “w”). These are not the same
spellings written by Molina and other Spanish priests in their compilations of
Nahuatl dictionaries. To characterize Gaspar de Torres as a poor linguist or poor
speller would not be accurate, since his codex was obviously not written to be
widely shared. The plant names add further support to our leading hypothesis that
Voynichese is derived from a Nahuatl lingua franca, which was a language of commerce that became extinct when it was replaced by Spanish (Dakin 1981).
Conclusions
The identification of plants in the Voynich Codex represents a unique challenge.
Amazingly, few professional botanists, except for Rev. H. O’Neill in 1944, have
tackled the phytomorphs in the Voynich Codex since its reappearance in 1912, even
though numerous botanists have attempted to identify the equally nebulous phytomorphs of the Codex Cruz-Badianus (Emmart 1940), Sahagún’s Florentine Codex
(1951–1982), and Hernandez et al. (1651). The difference is that these documents
usually have descriptions that allow some degree of identification, so it is not necessary to rely solely upon stylized sixteenth century botanical drawings. We also
have a recorded provenance for these works, which are not mysterious, like the
Voynich Codex. The identifications of phytomorphs of the Voynich Codex in the
next chapter are the fruition of efforts by an academic botanist and horticulturist,
and we fully expect that they will be refined in the future.
3 Iconography and Phytomorphic Identification
37
Literature Cited
Anderson, F.J. 1977. An illustrated history of the herbals. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Angarano, A., B. Baldan, R. Marcucci, T. Pievani, F. Piovan, M. Villani, and S. Zaggaia. 2017.
Hortus Mirabilis: Discovering the world’s oldest botanical garden. New York: Rizzoli.
Arber, A. 1970. Herbals: Their origin and evolution, a chapter in the history of botany 1470–1670.
Darien: Hafner Publishing Co.
Asprey, G. F., and P. Thornton. 1953, 1954. Medicinal plants of Jamaica. Parts I and II. West Indian
Medical Journal 2(4):233–252, 3(1):17–41.
Ayensu, E.S. 1981. Medicinal plants of the West Indies. Algonac: Reference Publications.
Baracutei Estevez, J. 2008. Amerindian mtDNA in Puerto Rico: When does DNA matter? Centro
Journal 20: 218–228.
Baracutei Estevez, J.  2016. Buyío Taimani—Agua Dulce: Continuing Taino Traditions in the
Dominican Republic–Part 1 of 2. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/311946428.
Accessed 12 Sept 2018.
Baracutei Estevez, J. 2018. Agua dulce in Kiskeya: Tobacco, casabe, water and stone. American
Indian 19 (3): 24–27.
Binnqüist, C. L. 2003. The endurance of Mexican amate paper: Exploring additional dimensions to
the sustainable development concept. D. Thesis. University of Twente, Enschede, Netherlands.
Binnqüist, C.L., A. Quintanar-Islas, and M.V. Meeren. 2012. Mexican bark paper: Evidence of history of tree species used and their fiber characteristics. Economic Botany 66: 138–148.
Blunt, W. 1971. The art of botanical illustration. London: Collins.
Blunt, W., and S. Raphael. 1979. The illustrated herbal. London: Thames and Hudson.
Clayton, M., L. Guerrini, and A. de Avila. 2009. Flora: The Aztec herbal. London: Royal College
Enterprises.
Collins, M. 2000. Medieval herbals: The illustrative traditions. London: The British Library.
Dakin, K. 1981. The characteristics of a Nahuatl lingua franca. In Nahuatl studies in memory of
Fernando Horcasitas, ed. Frances Karttunen. Texas Linguistic Forum 18:5–67.
Emmart, E.W. 1940. The Badianus manuscript (Codex Barberini, Latin 141) Vatican Library. An
Aztec Herbal of 1552. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Evans, S.T. 2000. Aztec royal pleasure parks: Conspicuous consumption and elite status rivalry.
Studies in the History of Gardens and Designed Landscapes 20: 206–228.
Evans, S.T. 2005. The Aztec palace under Spanish rule. Disk motifs in the Mapa de México de
1550 (Uppsala Map or Mappa de Santa Cruz). In The Postclassic to Spanish-era transition
in Mesoamerica, ed. S. Kepecs and R.T. Alexander, 13–33. Albuquerque: University of New
Mexico Press.
Evans, S.T. 2010. The garden of the Aztec philosopher-king. In Gardening: Philosophy for
everyone, ed. D. O’Brien, 207–219. London: Blackwell-Wiley.
Farfán, J.A.F., and J.G.R. Elferink. 2010. Ethnobotany and Aztec sexuality. Muenchen: Lincom
Europa.
Flaherty, E., A.O. Tucker, and J. Janick. 2018. Zoomorph identification. Chapter 6. In Unraveling
the Voynich Codex: a 16th century Mexican manuscript, ed. J. Janick and A.O. Tucker. Cham:
Springer Nature.
González, C.M. 2018. Abuelas, ancestors and atabey: The spirit of Taíno resurgence. American
Indian 19 (3): 18–23.
Granberry, J., and G.S. Vescelius. 2004. Languages of the pre-Columbian Antilles. Tuscaloosa:
University of Alabama Press.
Granziera, P. 2001. Concept of the garden in pre-Hispanic Mexico. Garden History 29: 185–213.
Granziera, P. 2005. Huaxtepec: The sacred garden of an Aztec emperor. Landscape Research 30
(1): 81–107.
Guy, J.B.M. 1991. Voynich revisited. Cryptologia 15: 161–166.
Literature Cited
38
Hernández, F., F. Celsi, F. Colonna, B. Deversini, J. Faber, J. Greuter, V. Mascardi, N.A. Recchi,
and J. Terentius. 1651. Rerum medicarum Novae Hispaniae Thesarus, seu, Plantarum animalium mioneralium Mexicanorum historia. Romae: Vitalis Mascardi.
Janick, J., and A.O. Tucker, eds. 2018. Unraveling the Voynich Codex: Mexican. Cham: Springer
Nature.
Marcus, J. 1992. Mesoamerican writing systems: Propaganda, myth, and history in four ancient
civilizations. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Martinez, M. 1969. Las plantas medicinales de Mexico. 5th ed. Mexico: Ediciones Botas.
Moerman, D.E. 1998. Native American ethnobotany. Portland: Timber Press.
Nuttall, Z. 1925. The gardens of ancient Mexico. Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution
1923: 453–464.
O’Neill, H. 1944. Botanical observations on the Voynich MS. Speculum 19: 126.
Polastron, L.X. 2007. Books on fire: The destruction of libraries throughout history. Rochester:
Inner Traditions.
Sahagún, B. de. 1951–1982. Florentine Codex. General history of the things of New Spain. [1540–
1585] 12 vol. Transl. A. J. O. Anderson and C.E. Dibble. Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press.
Schroeder, H., M.  Sikora, S.  Gopalakrishnan, L.M.  Cassidy, P.M.  Delser, M.S.  Velasco,
J.G. Schraiber, S. Rasmussen, J.R. Homburger, M.C. Ávila-Arcos, M.E. Allentoft, J.V. MorenoMayar, G. Renaud, A. Gómez-Carballa, J.E. Laffoon, R.J.A. Hopkins, T.F.G. Higham, R.S. Carr,
W.C. Schaffer, J.S. Day, M. Hoogland, A. Salas, C.D. Bustamant, R. Nielsena, D.G. Bradley,
C.L. Hofman, and E. Willerslev. 2018. Origins and genetic legacies of the Caribbean Taino.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115: 2341–2346.
Strong, L.C., and E.L. McCawley. 1947. A verification of a hitherto unknown prescription of the
16th century. Bulletin of the History of Medicine 21: 898–904.
Torres, E.C. n.d.-a. Green medicine: Traditional Mexican-American herbal remedies. Kingsville:
Nieves Press.
Torres, E.C. n.d.-b. The folk healer: The Mexican-American tradition of the curanderismo.
Albuquerque: Nieves Press.
Torres, E.C. 2006. In Healing with herbs and rituals: A Mexican tradition, ed. T.L. Sawyer Jr.
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Torres, E.C., and T.L. Sawyer Jr. 2005. Curandero: A life in Mexican folk healing. Albuquerque:
University of New Mexico Press.
Truitt, J. 2018. Sustaining the divine in Mexico Tenochtitlan: Nahuas and Catholicism 1523–1700.
Oceanside: Academy of American Franciscan History.
Tucker, A.O., and J.  Janick. 2016. Identification of phytomorphs in the Voynich Codex.
Horticultural Reviews 44: 1–64.
Tucker, A.O., and J. Janick. 2017. Identification of plants in the 1584 murals of the Casa del Deán,
Puebla, Mexico. Notulae Botanicae Horti Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca 45 (1): 1–8. http://www.
notulaebotanicae.ro/index.php/nbha/article/view/10692/7966.
Tucker, A.O., and J.  Janick. 2018a. Phytomorph and geomorph identification, chapter 4. In
Unraveling the Voynich Codex. Cham: Springer Nature.
Tucker, A.O., and J. Janick. 2018b. Phytomorphs in the pharmaceutical section: The Rosetta stone
of the Voynich codex. Chapter 5. In Unraveling the Voynich Codex. Cham: Springer Nature.
Tucker, A.O., and R.H. Talbert. 2013. A preliminary analysis of the botany, zoology, and mineralogy
of the Voynich manuscript. HerbalGram 100: 70–85.
von Hagen, V.W. 1944. The Aztec and Maya papermakers. New York: J. J. Augustin Publisher.
Wade, L. 2018. ‘Extinct’ Caribbeans have living descendants: Ancient DNA from Taino woman
shows kinship to modern genomes. Science 359 (6378): 858.
Woodaman, R. 2017. Taíno survival: Back into history. National Museum of the American Indian
Winter: 14–21.
Zandbergen, R. 2004–2017. The Voynich manuscript. www.voynich.nu/. Accessed 6 June 2017.
3 Iconography and Phytomorphic Identification
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019 39
A. O. Tucker, J. Janick, Flora of the Voynich Codex,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19377-5_4
Chapter 4
Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich
Codex
The present chapter more than triples the number of plants identified in the Voynich
Codex, from 4 species identified in 1944 by Rev. Hugh O’Neill, to 37 by Tucker and
Talbert in 2013, to 55 species by Tucker and Janick in 2016, and to 57 species in
Tucker and Janick (2018, Chap. 4). The phytomorphs in the Voynich Codex are
listed alphabetically by family and species, and the folio designation is listed. Each
identification is divided into four subsections:
Description: a botanical name including formal botanical identification
Distribution: ecology and range
Names: English and Spanish names, and names in Mesoamerican when known
Uses: medicinal, culinary, and other uses of these and related species
Each identification is compared with contemporary photographic images, including
herbarium sheets or botanical drawings, or sixteenth century images, when appropriate. The names transliterated from Voynichese follow Janick and Tucker (2018).
The reliability and accuracy of identification will be explained in the text. Those
phytomorphs in which the species cannot be accurately determined will be identified as “generic name sp.” indicating the specific epithet is unknown. Species in
doubt will be followed by a question mark (?). Where an identification is suggested
or likely, the species will be followed by the abbreviation “cf.” meaning “compares
favorably,” and a suggested species will be listed.
Nomenclature follows our interpretation of the cited revisions, and/or the
Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN) (USDA, ARS 2015), and/or
the collaboration of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, and the Missouri Botanical
Garden (Plant List 2013).
40
Lycophytes and Ferns
Huperziaceae/Lycopodiaceae
Fol. 100v(2)#6, Fol. 102r#11. Huperzia beiteliana (Fig. 4.1)
Description These phytomorphs have tiny, linear leaves on a branched stem clearly
of the Huperziaceae/Lycopodiaceae. The best fit is the terrestrial club-moss
Huperzia beiteliana Mickel (Fig. 4.1a–c).
Distribution Pine-oak forests of Mexico (Mickel and Smith 2004).
Names A club-moss (English). The word accompanying the phytomorph on fol.
102r#11, opcey, is transliterated as āhu/gumi, probably derived from the Spanish,
ahumi, I smoke, perhaps referring to the release of spores, which resemble smoke
(Fig. 4.1d).
Uses Huperzia spp. continue to be used medicinally (Ma et al. 2007).
Fig. 4.1 Huperzia beiteliana: (a) Fol. 100v(2)#6; (b) fol. 102r#11; (c) Huperzia beiteliana.
(Source: http://www.fernsoftheworld.com/2014/12/07/huperzia-beiteliana); (d) smoky discharge
of spores from a related species, Lycopodium lagopus (Laestadius ex C. Hartman); G. Zinserling
ex Kuzeneva-Prochorova. (Source: Jordan Metzgar)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
41
Fol. 100v(1)#13. Huperzia dichotoma (Fig. 4.2)
Description This phytomorph has tiny, linear leaves clearly of the Huperziaceae/
Lycopodiaceae. This phytomorph (Fig. 4.2a) is the pendant epiphyte H. dichotoma
(Jacq.) Trevis. (Fig. 4.2b).
Distribution Native of wet montane forests from Florida to Paraguay and the
Caribbean (Mickel and Smith 2004).
Names A club-moss (English). The word accompanying this phytomorph, opcey
Teasal, transliterates to māncuonoca, which may be derived from mano
(Spanish)  +  cuānaca (Nahuatl) for chicken hand/foot (Fig.  4.2c) (Herrera 2004;
Karttunen 1983; Siméon 2010), alluding to the epiphytic attachment of this species.
This may be the same as quamiauatl/quamiahoatl in Hernández et al. (1651:258)
and Hernández (1942:1034) (Batres et al. 2012) or tlamacazqui ipapa in Sahagún’s
Florentine Codex (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989).
Uses Huperzia spp. continue to be used medicinally (Ma et al. 2007). Recently, this
species has been found to have anticholinesterase activity because of the huperzine
A content (Vázquez García et al. 2017).
Fig. 4.2 Huperzia dichotoma: (a) fol. 100v(1)#13; (b) Huperzia dichotoma. (Source: permission
of Bobby Hattaway, PhD); (c) chicken foot. (Source: http://www.paulmidler.com/wheres-mychicken-foot)
Lycophytes and Ferns
42
Fol. 100v(1)#12, 101r#9. Huperzia reflexa (Fig. 4.3)
Description These phytomorphs (Fig. 4.3a, b) have tiny, linear leaves clearly of
the Huperziaceae/Lycopodiaceae. The best fit is Huperzia reflexa (Lam.) Trevis.
(Fig. 4.3c).
Distribution Native of wet montane forests from Mexico to Paraguay and the
Caribbean; terrestrial, rarely epiphytic (Mickel and Smith 2004).
Names A club-moss (English). The word accompanying the phytomorph, dykceal, on fol. 100v(1)#12 transliterates to chitlmoca, perhaps derived from mocacoquitl, Nahuatl for “full of mud” (Herrera 2004; Karttunen 1983; Siméon 2010),
perhaps indicating a terrestrial habitat or visible fungi at the base. The Lycopodiaceae
have associated mycorrhizal associations that can persist in the photosynthetic sporophytes (Winther and Friedman 2008); note the fungi at the base of Fig. 4.3c.
Uses Huperzia spp. continue to be used medicinally (Ma et  al. 2007) and have
recently been shown to have alkaloids that inhibit acetylcholinesterase activity in
the brain (Konrath et al. 2012).
Fig. 4.3 Huperzia reflexa: (a) fol. 100v(1)#12; (b) fol. 101r#9; (c) H. reflexa. (Source: http://
www.plantsystematics.org/imgs/robbin/r/Lycopodiaceae_Huperzia_reflexa_39169.html)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
43
Hymenophyllaceae
Fol. 101v(1)#8. Trichomanes ekmanii (Fig. 4.4)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.4a) is of two fronds on a rhizome; this
matches Trichomanes ekmanii Wess. Boer (Fig.  4.4b), which is mostly one cell
thick and typically found in very wet areas. This species has recently been
transferred to Dimoglossum ekmanii (Wess. Boer) Ebihara & Dubuisson as a
result of chlorplast sequences (Ebihara et al. 2006).
Distribution Native from Mexico to Brazil and the Caribbean (Mickel and Smith
2004). Older leaves are typically rotund, as in the phytomorph.
Names Filmy fern (English). The word accompaning this, dolary, chācaoei,
might be derived from the Nahuatl chica, to spit (Herrera 2004; Karttunen 1983;
Siméon 2010), perhaps describing the moist air of the habitat where this species is
found.
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.4 Trichomanes ekmanii: (a) fol. 101v(1)#8; (b) T. ekmanii. (Source: Emily Lisborg)
Lycophytes and Ferns
44
Ophioglossaceae
Fol. 100v#5. Ophioglossum palmatum (Fig. 4.5)
Description O’Neill (1944) identified the eusporangiate fern Botrychium lunaria
(L.) Sw., moonwort, in the Voynich Codex on fol. 100v. O’Neill did not designate
the phytomorph number, only the folio number (100v), but only #5 would match
with a member of the Ophioglossaceae. The fronds with both a fertile and a sterile
portion, the fertile portion bladelike and palmately lobed into multiple segments
(Fig. 4.1b) suggest instead a specimen of the eusporangiate fern Ophioglossum
palmatum L. A photograph of this species (Fig. 4.1b) confirms the identification.
Distribution Epiphytic in dense, wet forests at low to middle elevations from
Florida to Brazil (Mickel and Smith 2004).
Names Hand fern (English). The word accompanying this phytomorph, soleeesoe, nācâăăanāă, has an unlnown meaning.
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.5 Ophioglossum palmatum: (a) fol. 100v#5; (b) O. palmatum. (Source: Robbin Moran,
New York Botanical Garden)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
45
Osmundaceae
Fol. 100v(1)#6. Osmunda regalis var. spectabilis (Fig. 4.6)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.6a) is a doubly pinnately compound leaf
with oblong leaflets and attached rhizome. This is similar to fol. 90r, see Fig. 4.161,
Osmunda regalis L. var. spectabilis (Willd.) A. Gray (Fig. 4.6b).
Distribution Native to North and South America. In Mexico, this species is especially abundant in Chiapas (Mickel and Smith 2004), where Mam, a Mayan language, is spoken.
Names Royal fern or flowering fern (English). The word accompanying this phytomorph, ykceocedy, itlmamchi, might reflect the language of Chiapas. The itlprefix may be derived from Nahuatl itla, thing, while the -chi suffix is probably
derived from chi, make (Herrera 2004; Karttunen 1983; Siméon 2010).
Uses The medicinal value of O. regalis by the Iroquois is discussed by Moerman
(1998). Although found worldwide, the medicinal value varies, primarily centered
upon the astringent qualities of the rhizome.
Fig. 4.6 Osmunda regalis var. spectabilis: (a) fol. 100v(1)#6; (b) O. regalis var. spectabilis.
(Source: http://wisflora.herbarium.wisc.edu/imagelib/imgdetails.php?imgid=15457)
Lycophytes and Ferns
46
Pteridaceae
Fol. 100v(1)#10. Ceratopteris pteridoides? (Fig. 4.7)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.7a) consists of three fern fronds, but it is
unusual in not being deeply divided. This might match the aerial leaves of
Ceratopteris pteridoides (Hook.) Hieron. (Fig.  4.7b), a water fern of subfamily
Ceratopteridoideae of the Pteridaceae. Aerial leaves are only lobed, but submerged
leaves are 2–3× pinnatifid.
Distribution Pantropical, native from southeast United States to Brazil and the
Caribbean (Mickel and Smith 2004).
Names Water fern (English). The accompanying word, okceeor, ātlmaāe,
includes the Nahuatl atl, water, and perhaps mayaui, to remove (Herrera 2004;
Karttunen 1983; Siméon 2010), suggesting its use as a diuretic.
Uses This species has been long used in Colombia as a diuretic, whose use has
recently been reaffirmed (Alviz et al. 2013).
Fig. 4.7 Ceratopteris pteridoides?: (a) fol. 100v(1)#10; (b) C. pteridoides. (Source: https://
rybicky.net/atlasrostlin/ceratopteris_pteridoides)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
47
Schizaeaceae
Fol. 101v(1)#12. (Fig. 4.8). Schizaea elegans (Fig. 4.8)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.8a) shows a dichotomously branched frond
of a fern. Schizaea elegans (Vahl) Sw. fits rather well (Fig. 4.8b).
Distribution Native from Mexico to Brazil (Mickel and Smith 2004).
Names Comb fern (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.8 Schizaea elegans: (a) folio 101v(1)#12; (b) Schizaea elegans. (Source: https://alchetron.
com/Schizaea-4418061-W)
Gymnosperms
Pinaceae
Fol. 100r#9. Picea sp.? (Fig. 4.9)
Description The phytomorph (Fig.4.9a) appears to be to be an excurrent tree
(Fig. 4.9b) with pendulous branches. Typically, excurrent trees are conifers of genera such as Abies, Picea, Pinus, or Pseudotsuga. None of these species exhibit pendulous growth when young, but older specimens may be somewhat pendulous; an
older stand of Picea chihuahuana Martinez (Fig. 4.9b) might be an example.
Distribution Picea chihuanhuana is native to northwest Mexico.
Names This phytomorph is labeled sosam, nanoya, Spanish for grandmother, a
sobriquet sometimes applied to the oldest member of the forest.
Uses Moerman (2009) records medicinal uses for Picea spp.
Gymnosperms
48
Fig. 4.9 Picea sp.?: (a) fol. 100r#9; (b) Picea chihuahuana. (Source: http://www.inforural.com.
mx/peligro-extincion-arbol-picea-la-tala-ilegal)
Taxodiaceae
Fol. 100r#15. Taxodium sp., cf. Taxodium mucronatum
(T. huegelii, T. mexicanum)? (Fig. 4.10)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.10a) is very crude but appears to be either
the cones or whole plant outlines of the Mexican cypress, T. mucronatum Ten. (T.
huegelii hort. ex P. Lawson & C. Lawson; T. mexicanum Carrière). The cones and
forked tree trunk of T. mucronatum are shown in Fig. 4.10b, c. This species is often
multi-trunked in older specimens such as The Tule tree, or el rbol del Tule on the
grounds of a church in Santa María del Tule in the Mexican state of Oaxaca, ca.
2000 years old.
Distribution Southwestern United States, Mexico, and Guatemala.
Names Montezuma bald cypress, Montezuma cypress (English); sabino (Spanish);
ahoehoetl/aueuetl/ahuehuetl, ahuehuecuahuitl, or ahuehuete/ahuehuetl (Nahuatl)
(Hernández et al. 1651; Hernández 1942; Dressler 1953; Díaz 1976; Farfán and
Elferink 2010). The name accompanying this phytomorph, otols, transliterates to
ātlācân, perhaps derived from atlacaneci, Nahuatl for bestial man, from the resemblance of the phytomorph to testicles.
Uses Medicinal uses in Mexico are recorded by Martinez (1969). Ornamental use
by Aztecs in garden paths.
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
49
Fig. 4.10 Taxodium sp.: (a) fol. 100r#15); (b, c) grouped strobili (cones) and forked tree trunk of
T. mucronatum, respectively. (Source: Geoff Stein)
Angiosperms
Acanthaceae
Fol. 11v. Ruellia tuberosa (Fig. 4.11)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.11a) has an actinomorphic bluish corolla
with cuneate corolla lobes. The leaves are oval to oblong with cuneate edges, varying from green to coppery on a rhizomatous base with tubers. The best match fits the
variability of R. tuberosa L. (Fig. 4.11b). Though normally green, the leaves can be
coppery in dry situations or when dried improperly. In the phytomorph (Fig. 4.11a)
they appear as if re-arranged artificially after falling from dried specimens.
Distribution Native range, Central America, but naturalized from the Caribbean to
northern and western South America.
Names Minnieroot, fever root, duppy gun, snapdragon root, sheep potato (English).
Uses Ayensu (1981) records “Roots in tea for oliguria, heat, flu; in tisanes and infusions for venereal diseases and constipation…Roots: purgative, emetic, febrifuge.
Leaves: febrifuge, diaphoretic. Roots and leaves used for intestinal inflammation,
Angiosperms
50
colds, coughs, cooling drink. Tubers and leaves used with Cordia obliqua and
Annona muricata for blood disorders. Was used for cystitis and enteritis.” Naturalized
in the tropics around the world, it has become a major medicinal plant and is used
for anticancer activity; antidiabetic, antihyperlipidemic, and hepatoprotective activity; antimicrobial activity; antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activity; antioxidant activity; antispermatogenic activity; anti-ulcer activity; cardiovascular and
hypertensive activity; and purgative and cholinergic activity (Afzal et  al. 2015;
Khachitpongpanit et al. 2016; Pardeshi et al. 2017).
Fig. 4.11 Ruellia tuberosa: (a) fol. 11v; (b) R. tuberosa inflorescence. (Source: J.M. Garg CC BY
3.0); (c) tuberous roots. (Source: https://resepamelia.blogspot.com/2015/04/obat-diabetes-tanaman-pletekan-atau.html)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
51
Amaranthaceae
Fol. 3r. Amaranthus sp., cf. A. cruentus (Fig. 4.12)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.12a) is foliar only, with leaves of green,
white, and red; it matches a cultivar of Amaranthus cf. cruentus L., (Fig. 4.12b) with
red and green leaves.
Distribution Native to Central America but now naturalized worldwide.
Names Blood, red, or purple amaranth (English); huautli (Nahuatl). Probably
illustrated as uauhquilitl/uauhtli of pl. 462 of the Florentine Codex (Sahagún 1963):
“It has no stems. It is slender. It has spikelets; [these] are like amaranth. For this
reason it is called uauhçacat; it has many seeds, much like amaranth. And its special
attribute is to cover the plots seeded with amaranth.”
Uses In addition to being a traditional food and medicinal, Amaranthus cruentus is
an antioxidant (Nana et al. 2012).
Fig. 4.12 Amaranthus sp.: (a) fol. 16v; (b) A. cruentus. (Source: http://www.wikiwand.com/en/
Amaranthus_cruentus)
Angiosperms
52
Apiaceae
Fol. 87v, Right Side. Cymopterus sp.? cf. C. multinervatus (Fig. 4.13)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.13a) has a cyme-like inflorescence that
might be Apiaceae. The foliage is once-pinnatifid, the roots ample. This might be a
Cymopterus sp., Cymopterus multinervatus (J.M.  Coult. & Rose) Tidestrom
(Fig. 4.13b).
Distribution Native from California to Mexico.
Names Purple-nerve spring parsley (English)
Uses The culinary and medicinal value of Cymopterus species is discussed by
Moerman (1998) and Moore (1990).
Fig. 4.13 Cymopterus sp.?: (a) fol. 87v; (b) C. multinervatus. (Source: http://www.fireflyforest.
com/flowers/2742/cymopterus-multinervatus-purplenerve-springparsley)
Fol. 16v. Eryngium sp., cf. E. heterophyllum (Fig. 4.14)
Description Probably the most phantasmagoric phytomorph in the Voynich Codex
is the Eryngium sp. portrayed on fol. 16v (Fig. 4.14a). The inflorescence is colored
blue, the leaves red, and the rhizome ochre, but the features verge on a stylized
appearance rather than the botanical accuracy of the Viola bicolor of fol. 9v. This
lack of technical attention makes identification beyond genus difficult. However, a
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
53
conjecture might be Eryngium heterophyllum Engelm (Mathias and Constance 1941).
This species has similar blue inflorescences (Fig.  4.14b), involucral bracts
(Fig. 4.14c), and stout roots, and it also develops rosy coloring on the stems and
basal leaves (Fig. 4.14c). This lack of concern about the shape of the leaves also
plagues identifications in the Codex Cruz-Badianus (Clayton et al. 2009). However,
E. heterophyllum has pinnately compound leaves, not peltate, but leaves subtend the
inflorescence and cover the stem, suggesting that the phytomorph was drawn from
a dried, fragmented specimen.
Distribution Native to Mexico and to Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas in the
United States.
Names Mexican thistle, Wright’s eryngo, Mexican eryngo (English).
Uses Gallstone treatment in Mexico; experimental evidence for a hypocholesteremic effect (Navarrete et al. 1990).
Fig. 4.14 Eryngium sp.: (a) fol. 16v; (b) inflorescence of E. heterophyllum. (Courtesy of Blooms
of Bessihngham®); (c) leaves of E. comosum R. Delaroche illustrating anthocyanin accumulation.
(Courtesy of plantae mexicanae tenorianae, Pedro Tenorio-Lezama)
Angiosperms
54
Folio 41v. Lomatium sp., cf. L. dissectum (Fig. 4.15)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.15a) shows a plant that bears a dense fruiting
umbel with schizocarps that are flat, which is characteristic of the Apiaceae. These
schizocarps have a dark center and white wings. The growth habit is a rosette bearing coppery tuberous roots. The leaves are deeply dissected and palmate. The best
match would be biscuitroot, a Lomatium sp., most probably dissectum (Nutt.)
Mathias & Constance (Fig. 4.15b–d). The fruits (Fig. 4.15b) are flat schizocarps
with papery wings born in a full umbel (Fig. 4.15c). The growth habit is a rosette and
it bears tuberous roots (Fig. 4.15d) that are coppery when cleaned. The leaves vary
Fig. 4.15 Lomatium dissectum: (a) fol. 41v; (b) fruits; (c) foliage and flowers; (d) tuberous roots
(Tilley et al. 2010)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
55
from coarsely to deeply dissected, but are best described as pinnatifid, not palmate.
This confusion of palmate versus pinnate is common in both the Voynich Codex and
the Codex Cruz-Badianus.
Distribution Native from British Columbia to Mexico
Names Fernleaf biscuitroot (English).
Uses While sometimes taken for influenza, it can induce a rash (Marshall and
Thornton 2018).
Apocynaceae
Fol. 100r#14. Gonolobus chloranthus (Fig. 4.16)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.16a) appears to be the ridged fruit of an
asclepiad, possibly Gonolobus chloranthus Schltdl. (Fig. 4.16b).
Distribution Gonolobus is native to South and Central America and Mexico; G.
chloranthus is a Mexican species.
Names The tlalayotli in the Florentine Codex (Sahagún 1963: pl. 488a) with a
similar illustration of the fruit (but with smooth ribs) is nominally accepted as the
related species G. erianthus Decne., or calabaza silvestre. The name accompanying
this phytomorph, olceeom, is transliterated as ācâmăāh, perhaps derived from
acamaya, Nahuatl for crayfish or crab, alluding to the knobs on the ribs.
Uses The roots of G. niger (Cav.) Schult. are used today in Mexico to treat gonorrhea (González Stuart 2004).
Fig. 4.16 Gonolobus chloranthus: (a) fol. 100r#14; (b) G. chloranthus fruits. (Courtesy of
Guadalupe Cornejo-Tenorio and Guillermo Ibarra-Manríquez, The Field Museum)
Angiosperms
56
Araceae
Fol. 100r#7. Philodendron sp. cf. P. goeldii (Fig. 4.17)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.17a) appears to be the leaf or stem of an
aroid, most probably a species of Philodendron, but the crudeness of the drawing
belies whether this is a stem or compound leaf. If the latter, it may be a crude representation of the pedately compound leaf of Philodendron goeldii G.M.  Barroso
(Fig. 4.17b).
Distribution Philodendron goeldii is native to northern South America.
Names The name accompanying this phytomorph, ceolsain, transliterates as
macanol, perhaps derived from macana, the Taino wooden sword studded wth
obsidian (macuahuitl in Nahuatl (Fig. 4.17c).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.17 Philodendron sp.: (a) fol. 100r#7; (b) P. goeldii. (Courtesy of Steve and Janice Lucas);
(c) macuahuitl of the Aztecs from the Codex Ixtlilxochitl. (Source: http://www.mexico-france.com/
codices_esp.html)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
57
Fol. 100r#2. Philodendron mexicanum (Fig. 4.18)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.18a), appears to be a vining aroid with hastate leaves, ripped from a tree, most probably Philodendron mexicanum Engl.
(Fig. 4.18b, c).
Distribution Ranges from Mexico south through Central America and into
Colombia and Ecuador.
Names Known as huacalazochitl in Nahuatl (Zepeda and White 2008); known as
huacalxochitl/huacalxōchitl (huacal flower) in fol. 10v, 18v, 27v, 39v, and 56v of
the Codex Cruz-Badianus (Emmart 1940; Cruz and Badiano 1991; Alcántara Rojas
2008; Gates 2000; Clayton et al. 2009) or huacalazochitl (Zepeda and White 2008).
The name accompanying this phytomorph, soceorcFhy, nāmāepi, may be Mixtec
for soap plant.
Uses Bown (1988) writes of the Araceae in general: “Most of the species of Araceae
which are used internally for bronchial problems contain saponins, soap-like glycosides which increase the permeability of membranes to assist in the absorption of
minerals but also irritate the mucous membranes and make it more effective to cough
up phlegm and other unwanted substances in the lungs and bronchial passages.”
Fig. 4.18 Philodendron mexicanum: (a) fol. 100r#2; (b, c) leaves of P. mexicanum. (Source:
Dave’s Garden and Steve and Janice Lucas, respectively)
Angiosperms
58
Fol. 100v(2)#3. Philodendron sp.? cf. P. subincisum (Fig. 4.19)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.19a) is entirely vegetative, bent to one side,
i.e., a liana or vine. Leaves are folded in half but possibly sagittate with lobed margins and acute tips. This is colored blue, which could mean green suffused with
pink, purple, or blue. This matches a Philodendron subincisum Schott (Fig. 4.19b).
Color varies from green to maroon, and maroon variants are quite common in the
genus.
Distribution Philodendron subincisum is native to Mexico.
Names Giant aroid (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.19 Philodendron sp.: (a) fol. 100v(2)#3; (b) P. subincisum. (Source: Peter Richardson)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
59
Fol. 89v(1)#5. Spathiphyllum cannifolium? (Fig. 4.20)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.20a) appears to be an Araceae with a white
spathe, pale greenish spadix, and ample roots. One match might be a Spathiphyllum
sp., such as Spathiphyllum cannifolium (Dryand. ex Sims) Schott (Fig. 4.20b).
Distribution Native from Colombia to Venezuela.
Names Peace lily (English). The name accompanying this phytomorph, opololaiin, trasliterates to āgu/huācaācaoll. This might be derived from the Spanish
agua plus Nahuatl, cacçolli—watery hardness (Herrera 2004; Karttunen 1983;
Siméon 2010); this may allude to its aid in kidney stones.
Uses Widely planted in the tropics as an ornamental. This species is antibacterial
and anti-inflammatory (Abdullah et al. 2011; Ahmad Rausa et al. 2015). The fleshy
inflorescences of species of Spathiphyllum are eaten as a vegetable in Guatemala
and El Salvador (Chizmar Fernández 2009).
Fig. 4.20 Spathiphyllum cannifolium?: (a) Fol. 89v(1)#5; (b) S. cannifolium. (Source: Ong Kwan
Han @ natureloveyou.sg)
Fol. 42r (Left Side). Syngonium podophyllum (Fig. 4.21)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.21a) is entirely vegetative and consists of a
sagittate leaf that is green with white veins. This is most probably a leaf of the
Araceae, and Syngonium podophylllum Schott matches rather well (Fig. 4.21b).
Distribution Native from Mexico to central South America.
Names Syngonium, nephthytis (English).
Uses Medicinal among the Huastecs (Alcorn 1984). Today, it has been documented
as antibacterial (Camporese et al. 2003).
Angiosperms
60
Fig. 4.21 Syngonium podophyllum: (a) fol. 42r, left side; (b) S. podophyllum foliage. (Source:
Arseny Peisakhov)
Araliaceae
Fol. 35v. Polyscias guilfoylei (Fig. 4.22)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.22a) has pale green to brown fruits
of the Araliaceae with dark green, pinnately lobed leaves and ample roots.
Only the extremely variable P. guilfoylei (W.  Bull) L.H.  Bailey, is similar
(Fig. 4.22b).
Distribution This species is found in both the paleotropics and neotropics, from
Central America to South America and the Caribbean.
Names Geranium aralia (English).
Uses Ayensu (1981) records for P. guilfoylei: “Tea of leaves for colds; leaves for
head poultice.” Asprey and Thornton (1953, 1954) record for this species: “The
leaves are used in Jamaica to prepare tea for colds.”
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
61
Asparagaceae/Agavaceae
Fol. 100r#1. Agave sp. cf. A. ellemeetiana; Fol. 100r#4. Agave sp. cf.
A. atrovirens (Fig. 4.23)
Description These two phytomorphs (Fig.  4.23a, c) both resemble the genus
Agave. The one with smooth leaf margins, suggestive of a closed hand, is probably
A. ellemeetiana Jacobi (Fig. 4.23b), while the other appears to be a pressed specimen
with serrated or toothed leaf margins, quite possibly A. atrovirens Karw. ex SalmDyck (Fig. 4.23d).
Names Agave, century plant (English), maguey (Spanish); Nahuatl names are acametl, amole/amolli, macoztic metl, metl, metl coztli/mecoztli, mexcalmetl, nequametl, quametl, quetzalichtli, teohamatl/teoamatl, teometl, theometl, tlacametl,
tlacoamatl/tlacametl, and xolometl (Hernández et al. 1651; Hernández 1942; Reko
1947; Dressler 1953; Sahagún 1963; Diaz 1976; Ocaranza 2011). Phytomorph
101r#1 is labeled chosaroShol, mānoeātzācâ, which might be derived from mano
(Spanish), hand, and tzacua (Nahuatl), to close or enclose (Herrera 2004; Karttunen
1983; Siméon 2010), whereas fol. 100r#4 is labeled Chopary, māguoey, suggestive
of the Spanish loan word maguey from the Taino word for agave.
Distribution Agave is native to Mexico.
Uses The juice of agave, when fermented, is the source of pulque, mesal, and
tequila, a fermented alcoholic beverage considered sacred by the Aztecs and widely
consumed in sixteenth century colonial New Spain (Hough 1908; Dressler 1953).
Fig. 4.22 Polyscias guilfoylei: (a) fol. 35v; (b) leaves of P. guilfoylei. (Source: https://www.pinterest.com/pin/335940453433264062)
Angiosperms
62
Fig. 4.23 Agave sp.: (a) fol. 100r#1; (b) A. ellemeetiana. (Source: http://www.agaveville.org/
viewtopic.php?f=19&t=343); (c) fol. 100r#4; (d) A. atrovirens. (Source: Jeno Kapitany)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
63
Asteraceae
Fol. 48v. Acourtia runcinata? (Fig. 4.24)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.24a) has four terminal asterid heads, two per
stem, possibly subfamily Mutisioideae, with bluish and yellow heads and whitish
involucres. Leaves are pinnately lobed. Roots are ample. A match might be Acourtia
runcinata (Lag. ex D. Don) B.L. Turner (Fig. 4.24b).
Distribution Native from Texas to Mexico.
Names Featherleaf, desert peonia (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.24 Acourtia runcinata?: (a) fol. 48v; (b) A. runcinata. (Source: http://museum2.utep.edu/
chih/gardens/plants/acourtiaruncinata.htm)
Fol 8v. Acourtia thurberi (Fig. 4.25)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.25a) has four terminal asterid heads, possibly subfamily Mutisioideae, with light reddish heads and bluer involucres. Leaves
are very slightly serrate. A good match is Acourtia thurberi (A. Gray) Reveal &
King (Fig. 4.25b).
Distribution Native from Arizona and New Mexico to Chihuahua, Durango, and
Sonora.
Names Thurber’s desert peony (English).
Uses A decoction of this species is antidiabetic and antihyperalgesic (Martínez
et al. 2017).
Angiosperms
64
Fol. 41r. Ageratina adenophora? (Fig. 4.26)
Description This phytomorph of subfamily Asterideae tribe Eupatorieae
(Fig. 4.26a) has a whitish inflorescence without foliage. Roots are ample but not
tuberous. This could be any genus within this tribe, but Ageratina adenophora
(Spreng.) R.M. King & H. Rob., crofton weed, has many similarities (Fig. 4.26b).
Distribution Native to Mexico and possibly Central America.
Names Crofton seed, sticky snakeroot (English).
Uses The essential oil and aqueous extract of the leaves are antibacterial
(Rajalakshmi et al. 2016; Subba and Kandel 2012).
Fig. 4.25 Acourtia thurberi: (a) fol. 8v; (b) A. thurberi. (Source: T.R. Van Devender CC BY-NC 3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
65
Fol. 37r. Ageratina ligustrina (Fig. 4.27)
Description This Asteraceae phytomorph (Fig.  4.27a) of subfamily Asterideae
tribe Eupatorieae has a whitish inflorescence and elliptic leaves with an entire margin. This matches the variability of an Ageratina sp., most probably A. ligustrina
(DC.) R.M. King & H.Rob. (Fig. 4.27b).
Distribution Native from Mexico to Central America.
Names Privet-leaved ageratina, privet-leaved snakeroot (English).
Uses It is used for gastrointestinal diseases by the Highland Maya of Chiapas,
Mexico (Berlin and Berlin 1996).
Fig. 4.26 Ageratina adenophora?: (a) fol. 41r; (b) A. adenophora. (Source: http://keys.lucidcentral.org/keys/v3/eafrinet/weeds/key/weeds/Media/Html/Ageratina_adenophora_(Crofton_Weed).
htm)
Angiosperms
66
Fol. 53r. Ambrosia sp., cf. A. ambrosioides (Fig. 4.28)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.28a) has composite heads borne on a raceme.
Leaves are brown to green and sharply serrate. Roots are brown and segmented.
This matches the variability of Ambrosia ambrosioides (Delpino) W.W.  Payne
(Fig. 4.28b, c).
Distribution Native from Arizona and California to Mexico.
Names Canyon ragweed (English); chiura (Spanish).
Uses Leaves are anticarcinogenic from a cytotoxic component, damsin (Doskotch
and Hufford 1969). Moerman (2009) records that it is used among Native Americans
as an analgesic, antihemorrhagic, and cough medicine. He writes: “Gynecological Aid
Decoction of crushed roots taken by women for pains and menstrual hemorrhage.”
Fig. 4.27 Ageratina ligustrina: (a) fol. 37r; (b) A. ligustrina. (Source: http://www.virboga.de/
Ageratina_ligustri; (b_a.htm)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
67
Fol. 46v. Bartlettina sp. cf. B. sordida (Fig. 4.29)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.29a) belongs to Asteraceae, subfamily
Asterideae, tribe Eupatorieae. Inflorescence has serrate, somewhat hastate
leaves. Phyllaries are painted bluish. Roots are ample but not tuberous. This
bears an uncanny resemblance to the shrubby Bartlettina sordida (Less.) R.M. King
& H. Rob. (Fig. 4.29b). This species may be quauhalahuac/cuauh-alāhua-c of
fol. 57v and 59r of the Codex Cruz-Badianus (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947).
However, Mexico has 24 species of this genus (Villaseñor 2016), so it is difficult
to pin down.
Fig. 4.28 Ambrosia sp.: (a) fol. 53r; (b, c) flowers, inflorescences, and leaves of A. ambrosioides.
(Source: T.  Beth Kinsey and This work by Cabeza Prieta Natural History Association (http://
cabezaprieta.org) is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0
International License, respectively)
Angiosperms
68
Distribution Native from Mexico to South America.
Names Purple torch, blue mist flower (English).
Uses Ornamental.
Fig. 4.29 Bartlettina sp.: (a) fol. 46v; (b) B. sordida. (Source: Raulbot CC BY-SA 3.0)
Fol. 46r. Blumea viscosa? (Fig. 4.30)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.30a) shows two palmate leaflets/leaf, bent to
one side, along with white ray florets and red disk florets unlike any plant with an
Asteraceae inflorescence subfamily Asterideae tribe Inuleae. The rhizome is substantial. This may have been assembled from dried, fragmented leaves. Leaves
aside, the closest match may be Blumea viscosa (Mill.) V.M. Badillo (Fig. 4.30a),
which is perennial and smells of turpentine. This may be the same as
tezompotonic/“tzonpotonic” of Hernández et  al. (1651:1651) and Hernández
(1942:135). An additional Nahuatl name might be tlacochichic (Díaz 1976).
Distribution Weedy and of uncertain nativity, probably South America, the type
locality is Mexico (Nesom 1983).
Names Clammy false oxtongue (English).
Uses Naturalized in Benin, it is used as a diuretic, principally by pregnant women
(Achigan-Dako et al. 2010).
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
69
Fig. 4.30 Blumea viscosa?: (a) fol. 46r; (b) B. viscosa. (Source: Surajit Koley); (c) foliage.
(Source: Copyright © 2009 LasEcomujeres.org)
Fol. 48r. Chaenactis sp.? (Fig. 4.31)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.31a), with an Asteraceae subfamily
Asterideae tribe Helianthae inflorescence, has leaves that are palmately lobed at
the apex, a condition not found in nature. Roots are ample but not tuberous. This
might be a Chaenactis sp., but eight species of this genus are native to Mexico
(Villaseñor 2016), so it is difficult to give an exact species with such a crude drawing.
It may be Chaenactis stevioides Hook. & Arn. (Fig. 4.31b).
Distribution Chaenactis stevioides is native from California to Mexico.
Names Desert pincushion (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this genus is discussed by Moerman (1998).
Angiosperms
70
Fol. 87v (Left Side). Chaptalia sp.? cf. Chaptalia tomentosa (Fig. 4.32)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.32a) of Asteraceae subfamily Mutisioideae
has a terminal whitish inflorescence with entire spatulate leaves from a rosette on
ample roots. The overall resemblance is to a Chaptalia sp., e.g., Chaptalia tomentosa Ventenat (Fig. 4.32b).
Distribution Native from North Carolina to Texas.
Names Pineland daisy (English).
Uses Ayensu (1981) writes of C. nutans (L.) Polák: “Tea for tension and laryngitis.
Poultices of leaves on sores; leaf tea for amenorrhea. Diuretic. Decoction for colic,
colds, convulsions, drink for childbirth and to provoke menses. Leaf, boiled or
fresh, ground up with oil or fat, as a dressing for boils. Wounds.” Asprey and
Thornton (1953, 1954) also record for this species: “Browne ‘It is reckoned an
excellent diuretic and is used as such by many people.’ Sloane believed the decoction to be of value for colic and wind, colds, convulsions; as a drink for women at
childbirth and to provoke the menses. More recently, Beckwith reports the use of
the leaf, either boiled or fresh, ground up with oil or fat as a dressing for boils.”
The medicinal value of this species is also discussed by Moerman (1998).
Fig. 4.31 Chaenactis sp.?: (a) fol. 48r; (b) C. stevioides. (Source: http://snowbirdpix.com/
sonoran_desert_plant_page.php?id=1073)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
71
Fol. 50r. Cirsium sp.? (Fig. 4.33)
Description Asteraceae inflorescences of subfamily Carduoideae typically blast
apart from the center when dried, leaving behind an outer rim. This apparently happened with this phytomorph (Fig. 4.32a), and the artist merely painted what he saw.
Fortunately, the cypselae are displayed. The foliage, however, is not as accurate,
painted blue in the center with a crenulated margin that defies current botanical
descriptors. It might match a Cirsium sp., such as C. acantholepis (Hemsl.) Petr.
(Fig. 4.33b).
Distribution Native to Mexico.
Names Cirsium acantholepis is known as spiny or scaly thistle (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this genus is also discussed by Moerman (1998).
Fig. 4.32 Chaptalia sp.?: (a) fol. 87v, left side); (b) C. tomentosa. (Used by Permission of the
North Carolina Native Plant Society)
Angiosperms
72
Fol. 34v. Corethrogyne filaginifolia? (Fig. 4.34)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.34a) has five Asteraceae inflorescences of
subfamily Asterideae tribe Astereae. Phyllaries and ray florets are whitish; disk
florets are yellowish. Leaves are rotund to orbicular, green to brown, hairy, on side
branches. Roots are ample but not tuberous. No Asteraceae exactly matches this
description, but if created from dried, fragmented specimens, this falls within the
variability of Corethrogyne filaginifolia (Hook. & Arn.) Nutt. [Lessingia filaginifolia (Hook. & Arn.) M.A. Lane]. Ray florets range from white to purple. Leaves vary
from sessile to winged-petioled, linear to oblanceolate, spoon-shaped, or ovate,
entire or toothed, hairy (Fig. 4.34b, cultivar ‘Silver Carpet’).
Distribution California aster, native from Oregon to Mexico.
Names California aster (English).
Uses Moerman (1998) says of this species: “Kawaiisu Cold Remedy, Diaphoretic,
and Herbal Steam Infusion of twigs and leaves used as a steam bath to induce
sweating for colds.”
Fig. 4.33 Cirsium sp.?: (a) fol. 50r; (b) C. acantholepis. (Source: Anne-Marie Veith)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
73
Fol. 35r. Cosmos sp. cf. C. bipinnatus (Fig. 4.35)
Description This phytomorph has an Asteraceae inflorescence, probably subfamily Asterideae tribe Astereae, with eight reflexed, slightly tubular bluish ray florets
and numerous reddish disk florets (Fig. 4.35a). Foliage is linear and arranged in a
basket-like formation. Roots are ample and slightly tuberous. These characters can
only match a Cosmos sp., probably allied with the tubular or quilled forms of C.
bipinnatus Cav. (Fig.  4.35b). This species has high morphological variability
(Paniagua-Ibáñez et al. 2015).
Distribution C. bipinnatus is native to Mexico.
Names Grasol morado (Spanish), Mexican aster (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this genus is discussed by Moerman (1998). The essential oil of C. bipinnatus is antibacterial (Olajuyigbe and Ashafa 2014).
Fig. 4.34 Corethrogyne filaginifolia?: (a) fol. 34v; (b) California aster. (Source: http://davesgarden.
com/guides/pf/go/106755)
Angiosperms
74
Fol. 99v#18. Dahlia sp.? (Fig. 4.36)
Description This root phytomorph (Fig. 4.36a) is labelled olky, transliterated as
ăcatli, or reed, and might refer to the roots of a Phragmites sp. or another member of
the Poaceae. However, this is a conundrum, as tuberous roots of the Poaceae would
be expected to be segmented. Though de Ávila Blomberg (2012), Díaz (1976), and
Reko (1947) have stated that acatl refers to Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex
Steud., Díaz (1976) also suggests Quercus laurina Bonpl., Q. polymorpha Schldtl. &
Cham., Q. rugosa Née, or Q. peduncularis Née. None of these species have tuberous
roots that match the phytomorph illustrated as acatli. A hypothesis is that these are
the tubers of a Dahlia sp. (Fig. 4.36b), as one name for this genus in Nahuatl is
acocotli (Díaz 1976; Král 2014).
Distribution Native to Mexico.
Names Dahlia (English), dalia (Spanish).
Fig. 4.35 Cosmos sp.: (a) fol. 35r; (b) C. bipinnatus. (Source: http://b-and-t-world-seeds.com/
cartall.asp?species=Cosmos%20bipinnatus%20Sea%20Shells%20-%20Stars%20
Mix&sref=29083)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
75
Fol. 3v. Emilia fosbergii? (Fig. 4.37)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.37a) has two blue Asteraceae inflorescences
of subfamily Senecioneae with deeply pinnatifid green leaves. The tapering tap root
or rhizome is slightly pubescent. The bent inflorescence might indicate a birdpollinated species (ornithophilous), but no member of the Asteraceae in Mesoamerica
matches this description (Vogel 2015). One possibility is the highly variable Emilia
fosbergii Nicolson (Fig. 4.37b–d). Floral colors range from magenta to orange.
Distribution The native range is unknown, but it is found from Florida to South
America.
Names Florida tasselflower (English).
Uses Ornamental.
Fig. 4.36 Dahlia sp.: (a) fol. 99v#18; (b) roots. (Source: F.D. Richards CC BY-SA)
Uses Still used in gastrointestinal diseases by the Highland Maya of Chiapas,
Mexico (Berlin and Berlin 1996) and was also used for many medicinal and nutritive
properties by the Aztecs (Whitley 1985).
Angiosperms
76
Fol. 50v. Erigeron sp.? (Fig. 4.38)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.38a) of Asteraceae subfamily Asterideae tribe
Astereae inflorescence is painted with blue pigment so that the three buds are merged
into the principal unopened flower. Leaves are elliptic and slightly crenate. The roots
seem to be infected with root knot nematode. This matches the variability of an
Erigeron sp.; Fig. 4.38b, c show the flower and leaves of E. karvinskianus DC.
Distribution Genus is cosmopolitan but has high diversity in North America.
Names Erigeron karvinskianus is called Mexican fleabane (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this genus is discussed by Moerman (1998). The
medicinal value of E. karvinskianus is discussed by Chávez (2006) and González
Stuart (2004).
Fig. 4.37 Emilia fosbergii?: (a) fol 3v; (b) E. fosbergii flowers. (Source: Richard A. Howard,
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service); (c). E. fosbergii root. (Source: southeasternflora.
com); (d) E. fosbergii herbarium sheet. (Source: http://www.brevardfl.gov/NaturalResources/
EnvironmentalResources/Plants/page/12)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
77
Fol. 93r. Helianthus annuus (Fig. 4.39)
Description The phytomorph has a large, single yellow asterid head borne on a
stout, thick stem (Fig. 4.39a). Leaves are green, alternate, ovate-lanceolate, acute,
and entire. Petioles are short, with lines drawn down along the stem, possibly indicating a clasping base of the petiole or ridges along the stem. Roots are multiple,
primary, and unbranched. The best match is sunflower, Helianthus annuus L.
(Fig. 4.39b–d). This identification was first made by Hugh O’Neill (1944), who was
a plant taxonomist and Curator of the Catholic University herbarium (LCU), who
confirmed the determination with six botanists. Lincoln Taiz (Taiz and Taiz 2011),
emeritus plant physiologist at the University of California, Santa Cruz, confirms the
Fig. 4.38 Erigeron sp.: (a) fol. 50v; (b) E. karvinskianus flowers. (Source: Hectonichus CC
BY-SA 3.0 & www.iewf.org) and (c) leaves. (Source: www.iewf.org)
Angiosperms
78
resemblance, and Helianthus authorities Robert Bye (personal communication
2014), distinguished ethnobotanist at Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
(UNAM) in Mexico City, and Billie Turner (personal communication 2014), one of
the world’s leading experts on Mexican Asteraceae and former Curator of the
Herbarium (TEX) of the University of Texas at Austin, also confirm this identification. Sunflower researcher Jessica Barb (personal communication 2015) of Iowa
State University notes that inbred lines of sunflower have very short petioles (see
Fig. 4.39c), and that leaf variation is quite high. An illustration from the Florentine
Codex is shown in Fig. 4.39d.
Distribution The preponderance of evidence points to Mexico as the center of
domestication for sunflower (Harter et al. 2004; Heiser 2008; Lentz et al. 2008a, b;
Rieseberg and Burke 2008; Bye et  al. 2009; Blackman et  al. 2011; Moody and
Rieseberg 2012). It is widely naturalized in the United States.
Names Sunflower (English), girasol (Spanish). In Mexico, Nahuatl names in
period literature are chilamacatl (Sahagún 1963), chimalacatl or chimalacaxochitl
(Hernández 1942; Sahagún 1963), and chimalatl peruina (Hernández et al. 1651).
Chimal means shield in Nahuatl, and sunflower is often called shield flower.
Additional Nahuatl names are acahualli (Ramírez and Alcocer 1902; Dressler 1953)
and chimalxochitl (Zepeda and White 2008).
Uses Medicinal uses in Mexico are recorded by Martinez (1969). Food source
(oil, pseudocereal, starch, seed).
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
79
Fig. 4.39 Helianthus annuus: (a) fol. 93r; (b) seedhead of H. annuus. (Source: seagul CC0 1.0);
(c) Solis flor Peruuinus of Emanuel Sweerts of 1612 (Bleiler 1976), showing short petioles towards
the apex; (d) Nahua illustration of sunflower and three other plants; flowers as banquet gifts.
(Notice the sunflower in the center of the illustration.). (Source: Florentine Codex Book 9; http://
www.mexicolore.co.uk/aztecs/flora-and-fauna/sunflower)
Angiosperms
80
Fol. 53v. Hulsea heterochroma? (Fig. 4.40)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.40a) has a reddish Asteraceae inflorescence
of subfamily Heliantheae, with petiolate hastate green leaves, four per node. The
overall growth pattern is that of a shrub or, if created from fragmented dried samples, a vigorous stem. The root is ample but not tuberous. This might fit the variability of Hulsea heterochroma A. Gray (Fig. 4.40b).
Distribution Native from Utah to California.
Names Redray alpinegold (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.40 Hulsea heterochroma: (a) fol. 53v; (b) flowers. (Source: http://www.calflora.net/recentfieldtrips/lilysprings11parttwoB.html)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
81
Fol. 24v. Iostephane heterophylla? (Fig. 4.41)
Description Matching of this phytomorph (Fig. 4.41a) with a terminal actinomorphic floral feature that has seven or eight petals is impossible outside the Asteraceae.
If this is considered as an Asteraceae inflorescence of subfamily Asterideae tribe
Heliantheae, a match might fall within the variability of Iostephane heterophylla
(Cav.) Benth., assuming that it was assembled from fragmented specimens in
which the leaves were reversed (Fig. 4.41b). All features of this species, from foliage to flowers, are variable (Sandoval et  al. 2005). This species might be in
Hernández et  al. (1651:254) and Hernández (1942:116) as acuitzehuariracua
(Díaz 1976). In Sahagún’s Florentine Codex, it is called tecpatli/tecpalotl or tlacopatli/tlacopatle (Estrada Lugo 1989). Additional Nahuatl names include
chipaoacyztic and huichoquachaqua (Díaz 1976). Iostephane heterophylla var.
dicksonii W.  M. Sharp, without the typically serrated petals, is illustrated in
Fig. 4.41c.
Distribution Native to Mexico.
Names Aciotze-uariracua, hierba del manzo (Spanish).
Uses Medicinal uses in Mexico are recorded by Martinez (1969).
Fig. 4.41 Iostephane heterophylla: (a) fol 24v; (b) I. heterophylla herbaria sheet. (Source: Arizona
State University Vascular Plant Herbarium); (c) I. heterophylla var. dicksonii as Echinacea dicksoni, (Bot. Reg. XXIV, 27 (1838). http://delta-intkey.com/angio/images/brns027.jpg)
Angiosperms
82
Fol. 43v (Left Side). Isocarpha oppositifolia? (Fig. 4.42)
Description In this phytomorph (Fig. 4.42a) (as in fol. 30r, shown in Fig. 4.50
below), the trifoliate, entire leaves do not have a counterpart in nature; the artist reassembled this from dried, fragmented specimens. The roots are ample and have
been drawn snake-like, but not really tuberous. The trifoliate leaves aside, the
Asteraceae whitish inflorescence is of subfamily Asterideae tribe Eupatorieae and
falls within the variability of Isocarpha oppositifolia (L.) Cass. Flowers of the var.
acyhranthes (DC.) D.J. Keil & Stuessy are shown in Fig. 4.42b.
Distribution Native from Texas to Mexico.
Names Rio Grande pearlhead (English).
Uses Ayensu (1981) records for I. oppositifolia: “Boil roots with salt for tea for
chest colds; use leaves to increase appetite. Tonic known as Manzanilla de la Tierra.”
Fig. 4.42 Isocarpha oppositifolia?: (a) fol. 43v (left side); (b) flowers of var. acyhranthes. (Source:
http://chalk.richmond.edu/flora-kaxil-kiuic/i/isocarpha_oppositifolia_ssp_
achyranthes_4914_03s.JPG)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
83
Fol. 34r. Jungia pringlei? (Fig. 4.43)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.43a) bears an Asteraceae inflorescence that
is whitish to greenish and seems to be subfamily Mutisioideae. The leaves are palmately lobed, probably alternate. Roots are ample but not really tuberous. Species
of the Asteraceae with palmate leaves are rare, and no species fits this description
exactly, but one species that almost fits is the variability of Jungia pringlei Greenm.
(Fig. 4.43b). The inflorescences are rather narrow when fresh, but expand considerably upon drying.
Distribution Native to Mexico.
Names Unknown.
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.43 Jungia pringlei?: (a) fol. 34r; (b) J. pringlei herbarium sheet. (Source: George B. Hinton
Herbarium)
Angiosperms
84
Fig. 4.44 Lactuca graminifolia: (a) folio 2r; (b) L. graminifolia flower illustrating serrated petals
and purple-tipped bracts. (Source: Mary Keim CC BY-NC-SA 2.0); (c) L. graminifolia illustrating
tufted foliage that sometimes occurs. (Source: Arizona State University Vascular Plant Herbarium
CC BY-NC 3.0)
Folio 2r. Lactuca graminifolia (Fig. 4.44)
Description The phytomorph (Fig. 4.44a) shows a plant that has linear leaves in
groups and an asterid inflorescence. The bracts are prominently tipped in a brownish
color, while the petals of the flowers are serrate and off-white. A match might be
Lactuca graminifolia Michx. (Fig. 4.44b, c), which has linear leaves (Fig. 4.44c)
often in groups, and bracts tipped in purple. The petals are serrate and vary from a
very light blue-pink to white (Fig. 4.44b).
Distribution Native to Mexico, north to New Jersey, and south to Guatemala.
Names Grassland lettuce (English).
Uses Unknown.
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
85
Fol. 5r. Oclemena acuminata? (Fig. 4.45)
Description The phytomorph (Fig. 4.45a) has one terminal white Asteraceae inflorescence of subfamily Asterideae tribe Astereae on whorled green leaves with white,
somewhat tuberous roots. An absolutely perfect fit is whorled woodland aster,
Oclemena acuminata (Michx) Greene (Fig. 4.45b), but currently this plant is native
only as far south as the mountains of Georgia. If this is correctly identified, it either
was raised in a montane woodland setting at a botanic garden or was obtained in
trade. An alternative hypothesis is that the distribution of this species has become
more restricted within the past five centuries.
Distribution North America, currently as far south as Georgia.
Names Whorled wood aster (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.45 Oclemena acuminata?: (a) fol. 5r; (b) O. acuminata. (Source: Gerald C. Williamson,
USWildflowers.com, all rights reserved)
Angiosperms
86
Fol. 38v, 100v(2)#23. Onoseris onoseroides (Fig. 4.46)
Description The phytomorph in Fig. 4.46a) has a single Asteraceae inflorescence,
probably subfamily Mutisioideae, with ten bluish ray florets; disk florets of an undetermined number are also bluish. Leaves are hastate, in a bowl-like formation. Roots
are ample but not tuberous. This is repeated in the second fold-out (Fig. 4.46b) and
may reflect the variability of Onoseris onoseroides (Kunth) B.L. Rob., (Fig. 4.46c).
To compare with the artistic portrayal of this genus, the similar O. drakeana André
from Colombia is illustrated in Fig. 4.46d.
Distribution Native from Mexico to Colombia.
Names Unknown.
Uses Breedlove and Laughlin (1993) mention the medicinal value of this species.
Fig. 4.46 Onoseris onoseroides: (a) fol. 38v; (b) fol. 100v(2)#23; (c) O. onoseroides herbarium
sheet. (Source: Herbario Universidad del Tolima CC BY-NC 2.0); (d) illustration of O. drakeana
André from Colombia (André 1883)
Fol. 31r. Parthenium confertum (Fig. 4.47)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.47a) has an Asteraceae inflorescence of subfamily Asterideae tribe Heliantheae with whitish ray and disk florets. The leaves are
pinnatifid, but the green wash obscures the lobes. This matches the variability of
Parthenium confertum A. Gray, native to Mexico (Fig. 4.47b, c).
Distribution Native to Mexico.
Names Gray’s feverfew, lyreleaf feverfew (English).
Uses Anti-fungal from the pseudoguaianolides (Mears 1980).
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
87
Fol. 13r. Petasites sp., cf. P. frigidus var. palmatus (Fig. 4.48)
Description Based on the asterid inflorescence, large-cleft orbicular leaves, and
relatively large root system, the phytomorph shown in Fig. 4.48a is most probably a
Petasites sp. of the Asteraceae. The closest match might be P. frigidus (L.) Fr. var.
palmatus (Aiton) Cronquist (Fig. 4.48b).
Distribution Native to North America from Canada to California.
Names Western sweet coltsfoot (English).
Uses Petasites spp. are used as antiasthmatics, antispasmodics, and expectorants
and in salve or poultice form (Bayer et al. 2006).
Fig. 4.47 Parthenium confertum: (a) fol. 31r; (b, c) P. confertum. (Sources: Steven Schwartzman,
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center and http://museum2.utep.edu/chih/gardens/plants/NtoQ/
partheniumconf.htm)
Fig. 4.48 Petasites sp.: (a) fol. 13r; (b) P. frigidus var. palmatus. (Courtesy of Ben Legler)
Angiosperms
88
Fol. 10r. Plectocephalus americanus (Fig. 4.49)
Fig. 4.49 Plectocephalus americanus: (a) fol. 10r; (b) P. americanus flowers. (Source: James
O.  Baines, Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center); (c, d) herbarium sheets of P. americanus.
(Source: Univ of Texas at Austin, Billie L. Turner Plant Resources Center CC0 1.0 and University
of Nevada Herbarium CC BY-NC 3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
89
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.49a) has a solitary, bluish composite head of
subfamily Carduoideae borne on a scape (Fig. 4.49b). Leaves are green and slightly
serrate. Roots are brown, sometimes displaying tuber-like regions. The flower
matches the variability of the Eurasian Centaurea cyanus L., cornflower, but the
absence of tubers in this species rules it out. This also matches the variability of
Plectocephalus americanus (Nutt.) D. Don (Centaurea americana Nutt.) (Fig. 4.49c, d),
which often has thickened roots.
Distribution Native from the central United States to Mexico
Names Cardo del valle (Spanish). American basket-flower, American star-thistle,
powderpuff thistle, thornless thistle (English).
Uses Ornamental.
Fol. 30r. Pluchea odorata (Fig. 4.50)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.50a) has Asteraceae bluish inflorescence of
subfamily Asterideae tribe Inuleae. The trifoliate leaves, however, are a conundrum.
No species in tribe Inulaeae and only Koanophyllon tripartitum B.L.  Turner and
some specimens of Eupatorium cannabinum L. of the tribe Eupatoreae have been
reported with trifoliate leaves, and these do not have an entire margin. This leads to
the hypothesis that the artist drew these from fragmented, dried specimen and
artificially created trifoliate leaves. Ignoring the trifoliate leaves, this falls within
the variability of Pluchea odorata (L.) Cass. (Fig. 4.50b). A Nahuatl name of this
species is cihuapatli (Farfán and Elferink 2010).
Distribution Native from Maine to South America.
Names Sweetscent (English).
Uses Ayensu (1981) records for this species: “Leaves in decoctions for flu, fever,
pneumonia, hypertension, headache; in eyewash for ophthalmia. Leaf poultice for
cold in head…Used for sores and women in labor. Used as an antidote and stomachic. Pains, pulmonary tuberculosis, fever, convulsions, fainting. Hasten afterbirth. Boil for drinking or bathing; they wrap a sheet to cause sweating and eliminate
colds.” Asprey and Thornton (1953, 1954) record for this species: “Said by Steggerda
to be applied to sores and used for women in labour.” Alcorn (1984) and Martinez
(1969) record similar uses. The medicinal value of this genus is discussed by
Moerman (1998). More recent research has centered on the value of this species in
treating cancer (e.g., Blaschke et al. 2017; Seelinger et al. 2012). Mayans today uise
an infusion of the leaves to treat retention of the after-birth or to hasten menstruation
(Roys 1976).
Angiosperms
90
Fol. 27v. Podachaenium eminens (Fig. 4.51)
Description The phytomorph (Fig. 4.51a) has an Asteraceae inflorescence of subfamily Asterideae tribe Heliantheae with white ray florets and brownish disk florets.
Leaves are elliptic with serrate margins. The stem is stout and woody. Roots are
ample. This matches the variability of Podachaenium eminens (Lag.) Sch. Bip. ex
Sch. Bip. (Fig. 4.51b). The leaves (scented of pineapples) are elliptic towards the
apex, but the lower leaves are usually palmately lobed.
Distribution Native from Costa Rica to Mexico.
Names Giant tree daisy (English). This is called tacote (Sinaloa) or tora (Costa Rica)
(Standley 1920–1926).
Uses Standley (1920–1926): states: “In Sinaloa [Mexico] the fragrant leaves are
applied as poultices to wounds.” This species is anti-inflamatory from the sesquiterpene lactones (Castro et al. 2000).
Fig. 4.50 Pluchea odorata: (a) fol. 30r; (b) P. odorata inflorescence. (Source: Jim Conrad www.
backyardnature.net)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
91
Fol. 8r. Prenanthes sp., cf. P. trifoliata? (Fig. 4.52)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.52a) is entirely vegetative. However, the
saggitate leaf, subtended on the petiole by a pair of leaflets, is quite distinctive. It is
most probably a species of Prenanthes, possibly P. trifoliata (Cass.) Fernald
(Fig. 4.52b), or a related species.
Distribution Native to eastern North America.
Names Gall of the earth (English).
Uses This and related species have been used as medicinal herbs by the Cherokee,
Creek, Iroquois, and Seminole Nations (Hutton 2010; Moerman 1998).
Fig. 4.51 Podachaenium eminens: (a) fol. 27v; (b) P. eminens. (Source: Michael Kartuz)
Angiosperms
92
Fol. 27r (Left Side). Pseudelephantopus spicatus (Fig. 4.53)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.53a) has a bluish Asteraceae inflorescence of
subfamily Vernonieae with subsessile, broad, strap-like leaves. This matches the
variability of Pseudelephantopus spicatus (B. Juss. ex Aubl.) Rohr ex C.F. Baker
(Fig.  4.53b). Though normally considered a monospecific genus, the unresolved
name P. spiralis (Less.) Cronquist is sometimes applied to some variations of the
species (Fig. 4.53c).
Distribution Native from Florida to South America.
Names Dog’s tongue (English).
Uses Ayensu (1981) records for this species: “Herb teas for heat and fever; poultices
on sprains. Leaf juice in eye for ophthalmia. Root teas for diarrhoea and dysentery…
Plant tea for colds and heart trouble.” This species has been recently documented to
have antileishmanial sesquiterpene lactones (Odonne et al. 2010).
Fig. 4.52 Prenanthes trifoliata?: (a) fol. 8r; (b) P. trifoliata leaf. (Source: Louis-M. Landry)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
93
Fol. 29r. Pseudognaphalium macounii? (Fig. 4.54)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.54a) has an Asteraceae inflorescence of
subfamily Asterideae tribe Gnaphalieae with whitish phyllaries and brownish disk
florets. Leaves are serrate and somewhat elliptic. Roots are ample. This appearance matches the variability of Pseudognaphalium macounii (Greene) Kartesz
(Fig. 4.54b).
Distribution Native from British Columbia to Mexico.
Names Macoun’s cudweed (English).
Uses Species of this genus are sold as gordolobo for a variety of ailments.
Fig. 4.53 Pseudelephantopus spicatus: (a) fol. 27r; (b) P. spicatus herbarium sheet. (Source:
Wunderlin et al. 2018); (c) inflorescense. (Source: Mauricio Mercadante CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)
Angiosperms
94
Fol. 14r. Pseudogynoxys chenopodioides? (Fig. 4.55)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.55a) has a reddish Asteraceae inflorescence
of subfamily Heliantheae, with petiolate, hastate green leaves on a reddish stem.
The overall growth pattern is that of a vine or shrub or, if created from fragmented
dried samples, a vigorous stem. The root is curiously segmented. This might fit the
variability of the vine Pseudogynoxys chenopodioides (Kunth) Cabrera (Senecio
confusus Burtt) (Fig. 4.55b).
Distribution Native of Mexico
Names Mexican flame vine (English).
Uses This species is sometimes reputed to cause contact dermatitis in humans, but
under the name árnica, it is used to treat skin wounds and sores in animals (Morales
and Cruz 2007).
Fig. 4.54 Pseudognaphalium macounii?: (a) fol. 29r; (b) P. macounii. (Source: CC BY-SA 3.0
SEINet Arizona – New Mexico Chapter)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
95
Fol. 15r. Rafinesquia neomexicana (Fig. 4.56)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.56a) is a white Asteraceae of subfamily
Cichorioideae. The leaves are deeply serrate, clasping to the stem. A good fit is
Rafinesquia neomexicana A. Gray (R. californica Nutt.) (Fig. 4.56b, c). Older leaves,
especially in arid situations, become purple and eventually dried at the tips.
Distribution Native from Oregon to Mexico.
Names Annual California or desert chicory (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.55 Pseudogynoxys chenopodioides: (a) fol. 14r; (b) P. chenopodioides flower. (Source:
Dinesh Valke CC BY-SA 2.0)
Angiosperms
96
Fol. 40v. Smallanthus sp.(Fig. 4.57)
Description This folio contains two phytomorphs of the same plant, vegetative and
flowering (Fig. 4.57a). It is quite definitely a member of the Asteraceae, but the
genus is less obvious. With bluish petals, reddish involucre, palmately compound
leaves, and tuberous roots, this seems to fit a Smallanthus sp. It resembles somewhat
the leading Smallanthus species cultivated today, the edible yacón [S. sonchifolius
(Poepp.) H. Rob.]. (Fig. 4.57b, c).
Distribution Native to western South America.
Names Peruvian ground apple (English); jicama, yacón (Spanish).
Uses Food and natural sweetener.
Fig. 4.56 Rafinesquia neomexicana: (a) fol. 15r; (b) inflorescence. (Source: http://sev.lternet.edu/
file/2691); (c) shoot. (Source: Barry Breckling CC BY-NC-SA 3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
97
Fol. 39r. Stenotus acaulis? (Fig. 4.58)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.58a) is a stoloniferous perennial
Asteraceae of subfamily Asterideae tribe Astereae. The leaves are elliptic on an
alpine, stoloniferous root. This may match the variability of Stenotus acaulis (Nutt.)
Nutt. (Fig. 4.58b).
Distribution Native from Saskatchewan to California.
Names Stemless goldenrod (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this genus is discussed by Moerman (1998).
Fig. 4.57 Smallanthus sp.: (a) fol. 40v; (b) inflorescence and (c) tuberous roots of S. sonchifollius
(yacón). (Source: Rob Hille and NusHub, cropsforthefuture.org CC BY-SA 3.0, respectively)
Angiosperms
98
Fol. 18r. Symphyotrichum laeve var. geyeri (Fig. 4.59)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.59a) has 12 separated, ligulate, bluish florets on a branched Asteraceae inflorescence of subfamily Asterideae tribe Astereae.
Disk florets are reddish and raised. Involucre is prominent. Green leaves are cuneate, entire, and clasping. Roots are obvious but minimal. This matches the variability of Symphyotrichum laeve (L.) Á. Löve & D.  Löve var. geyeri (A.  Gray)
G.L. Nesom (Fig. 4.59b, c). Disk florets are initially yellow but change to orange
upon drying.
Distribution Native from western Canada to Mexico.
Names Smooth aster (English).
Uses The value of this species is discussed by Moerman (1998) as a drug, food,
and dye.
Fig. 4.58 Stenotus acaulis: (a) fol. 39r; (b) Stenotus acaulis. (Source: http://science.halleyhosting.com/nature/basin/sun/daisy/stenotus/acaulis/acaulis3.jpg)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
99
Fol. 43r. Townsendia sp.? (Fig. 4.60)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.60a) bears an Asteraceae inflorescence of subfamily Asterideae tribe Astereae. The disk florets are white; the ray florets are yellow.
The habit is that of an alpine perennial plant, such as a Townsendia sp. A herbarium
sheet of T. bakeri Greene is shown for comparison (Fig. 4.60b).
Distribution North America.
Names Genus known as Townsend daisies (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this genus is discussed by Moerman (1998).
Fig. 4.59 Symphyotrichum laeve var. geyeri: (a) fol 18r; (b) flowers; Source: http://botany.cz/
foto2/symphyolaeveherb1.jpg); (c) leaf. (Source: http://snowbirdpix.com/montana_plant_page_
test.php?id=1609)
Angiosperms
100
Fol. 20v. Tragopogon porrifolius (Fig. 4.61)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.61a) has a whitish involucre with sunken,
bluish phyllaries, putting this Asteraceae inflorescence in subfamily Cichorioideae.
Leaves are alternate, linear-lanceolate, tapering to a point, with a short petiole on a
stout stem. This matches the variability of Tragopogon porrifolius L. (Fig. 4.61b).
The tap root is banded (Fig. 4.61c). The leaves actually arise from a sheath by a
short petiole. The stout stem, milky sap, and leaf attachment of T. dubius Scop. is
shown in Fig. 4.61d. This was introduced early enough in North America to produce
T. × mirus Ownbey as an amphidiploid hybrid of T. porrifolius × T. dubius.
Tragopogon spp., like cornflowers (Centaurea cyanus L.), often occur as contaminants in plantings of wheat and rye, both of which were planted in early New Spain
(Dunmire 2004).
Distribution Native to Eurasia but introduced from Canada to Mexico. We have no
record of its introduction in New Spain.
Names Vipers-grass, goats-beard, salsify, oysterplant (English); salsifí, barba de
cabra, barbón (Spanish).
Uses McMahon (1806) lists this as a common garden vegetable in Pennsylvania,
planted in 1774 by Thomas Jefferson in Virginia (Betts 1985). Under the names
“vipers-grass” or “goats-beard,” early settlers to New England cultivated T. porrifolius and T. dubius (Leighton 1970). It has been a medicinal herb since the time of
Dioscorides (ca. 40–90  CE) (Janick et  al. 2013). Moerman (1998) discusses the
medicinal use of this species by the Navajo.
Fig. 4.60 Townsendia sp.?: (a) fol. 43r; (b) T. bakeri herbarium sheet. (Source: Field Museum of
Natural History CC BY-NC 3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
101
Fol. 17r. Vernonia marginata (Fig. 4.62)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.62a) has an Asteraceae inflorescence of
subfamily Vernonieae with dark bluish corollas, minimal involucre, and petiolated
linear to hastate leaves. Roots are without tubers. A good match is Vernonia marginata (Torr.) Raf. (Fig. 4.62b) (Redonda-Martinez 2017).
Distribution Native from Utah to Mexico.
Names Plains ironweed (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this genus is discussed by Moerman (1998).
Fig. 4.61 Tragopogon porrifolius: (a) fol. 20v; (b) flowers. (Source: Alice Stöcklin CC BY-SA
4.0); (c) taproot. (Source: Women Fitness [www.womenfitness.net]); (d) T. dubius stem. (Source:
http://wimastergardener.org/article/yellow-goatsbeard-tragopogon-spp)
Angiosperms
102
Fol. 87r. Xylorhiza sp.? cf. X. wrightii (Fig. 4.63)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.63a) of Asteraceae subfamily Asterideae
tribe Astereae, with an inflorescence painted with blue pigment, long involucre,
spatulate leaves, stout stem, and ample roots, resembles an alpine or desert aster that
is a subshrub. This resembles a Xylorhiza sp., possibly X. wrightii (A. Gray) Greene
(Watson 1977) (Fig. 4.63b)
Distribution Native from Texas to Mexico.
Names Big bend woody aster (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.62 Vernonia marginata: (a) fol. 17r; (b) V. marginata. (Source: Courtesy of Wynn Anderson,
University of Texas at El Paso)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
103
Boraginaceae/Hydrophyllaceae + Namaceae
Fol. 47v. Cynoglossum grande (Fig. 4.64)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.64a) has terminal blue flowers of six to seven
petals, with a raised white center, prominent cauline leaves, broadly elliptic basal
leaves, and broad, branched brown roots. This matches the variability of Cynoglossum
grande Douglas ex Lehm, except that this species has only five petals and the cauline leaves are smaller and closer to the base (Fig. 4.64b).
Distribution Native from British Columbia to California. Found in shady areas in
woodland and chaparral.
Names Pacific hound’s tongue (English)
Uses Grated root used as a dressing on burns and scalds; root used for stomach
aches and venereal disease among Native Americans (Moerman 2009).
Fig. 4.63 Xylorhiza wrightii?: (a) fol. 87r; (b) X. wrightii. (Source: W.D. and Dolphia Bransford,
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center)
Angiosperms
104
Fol. 56r. Phacelia campanularia (Fig. 4.65)
Description With blue flowers in a scorpioid cyme, dentate leaves, and overlapping leaf-like basal scales (Fig. 4.65a), the phytomorph is a good match for Phacelia
campanularia A. Gray, California bluebell (Fig. 4.65b, c), recently placed in the
Hydrophyllaceae.
Distribution A California native.
Names Desertbells, desert bluebells, desert scorpionweed, desert Canterbury bells
(English).
Uses Ornamental, poisonous to mammals.
Fig. 4.64 Cynoglossum grande: (a) fol. 47v; (b) C. grande. (Source: Eugene Zelenko, CC BY-SA 2.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
105
Fol. 39v. Phacelia crenulata (Fig. 4.66)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.66a) has bluish flowers in a cyme with deeply
pinnately lobed green leaves on broad, brown, branched roots. This closely matches
Phacelia crenulata Torr. (Fig. 4.66b), recently placed in the Hydrophyllaceae.
Distribution Native from Colorado to Mexico.
Names Notch-leaf scorpionweed, notch-leaved phacelia, cleft-leaf wild heliotrope
(English).
Uses Moerman (2009) records that it is used by the Hopi for injury in animals,
especially horses.
Fig. 4.65 Phacelia campanularia: (a) fol. 56r; (b, c) P. campanularia inflorescence. (Source:
courtesy of Chez Brungraber and GeorgeWilliams, respectively)
Angiosperms
106
Fol. 51v. Phacelia integrifolia (Fig. 4.67)
Description The phytomorph (Fig. 4.67a) has blue flowers on a scorpioid cyme
and narrowly elliptic, crenate leaves that curl. The roots are brown and branched.
This matches fairly well the variability of Phacelia integrifolia Torr. (Fig. 4.67b, c),
recently placed in the Hydrophyllaceae.
Distribution Native from Utah and Kansas south to Mexico.
Names Gypsum phacelia (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.66 Phacelia crenulata: (a) fol. 39v; (b) P. crenulata. (Courtesy of Tom Chester)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
107
Fol. 26r. Wigandia urens (Fig. 4.68)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.68a) bears what can be interpreted as bluish
flowers on a scorpiod cyme with leaves that are green, crenate, and obtuse. This
matches Wigandia urens (Ruiz & Pav.) Kunth very well (Fig. 4.68b), recently placed
in the Namaceae.
Distribution Shrub found from Mexico and south to Peru.
Names Wide/broad nettle (English); in Nahuatl, called chichicaztle (Díaz 1976);
also might match patlāhua-ctzītzicāztli on fol. 47r in the Codex Cruz-Badianus
(Emmart 1940; Díaz 1976; Cruz and Badiano 1991; Gates 2000; Clayton et  al.
2009; de Ávila Blomberg 2012).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.67 Phacelia integrifolia: (a) fol. 51v; (b) inflorescence and (c) shoot of P. integrifolia.
(Source: Nieland and Finley 2009 and Western New Mexico University Department of Natural
Sciences and the Dale A. Zimmerman Herbarium, respectively)
Angiosperms
108
Brassicaceae
Fol. 90v. Caulanthus heterophyllus (Fig. 4.69)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.69a) might be Caulanthus heterophyllus
(Nutt.) Payson, an annual species. The flowers of C. heterophyllus are four-petaled,
white with a purple streak down the center, with four protruding dark purple anthers
(Fig. 4.69b). Leaves vary from dentate to lobed but are typically clasping, not petiolate (Fig. 4.69c).
Distribution Native to California and Baja California (Al-Shehbaz 2012).
Names San Diego wild cabbage, San Diego jewelflower (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.68 Wigandia urens: (a) fol. 26r; (b) W. urens. (Source: Dick Culbert, CC-BY 2.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
109
Bromeliaceae
Fol. 7r. Guzmania lingulata? (Fig. 4.70)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.70a) seems to be entirely vegetative, with
white to green lanceolate leaves in a rosette, acute at the tips and very slightly and
remotely serrate, on a white stem. Roots are bifurcated. Actually, this bears resemblance to the colored, cupped bracts of the very variable Guzmania lingulata (L.)
Mez. (Fig. 4.70b). The flowering bracts vary from red to orange and yellow to white.
Distribution Native to rain forests from southern Mexico to South America and
the West Indies.
Names Scarlet star (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this species is limited but noted (Belotto et al. 2014).
Fig. 4.69 Caulanthus heterophyllus: (a) fol. 90v; (b) inflorescence and (c) shoots of C. heterophyllus.
(Source: National Park Service and Anthony J. Valois, respectively)
Angiosperms
110
Cabombaceae
Fol. 49v. Brasenia schreberi (Fig. 4.71)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.71a) bears one six-petalled flower, painted
bluish, which sprigs from a ring of orbicular peltate leaves with entire margins.
Remotely, they arise from a rhizome or corm. This matches very well the water
shield, Brasenia schreberi J.F. Gmel. (Fig. 4.71b).
Distribution Native to not only North and South America but also Eurasia and
Africa.
Names Water shield (English).
Uses The polysaccharide gel covering of the leaves has been documented to lower
cholesterol (Kim et al. 2015).
Fig. 4.70 Guzmania lingulata?: (a) fol. 7r; (b) G. lingulata. (Source: http://sinaiplants.com/index.
php/2013-12-14-05-10-26/bromeliad)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
111
Cactaceae
Fol. 99v#10. Cylindropuntia sp.? (Fig. 4.72)
Description This herbal root is labelled daiine, chollă, Spanish for skull or cholla
cactus, which may refer to a Cylindropuntia sp. (Fig. 4.72a). Some cacti roots are
tuberous when fresh, such as the roots of Opuntia chaffeyi Britton & Rose (Fig. 4.72b),
a related species.
Distribution Cactaceae are native to the New World, except for a few outliers in
Madagascar.
Names Cholla (Spanish and English).
Uses Cylindropuntia imbricata (Haw.) F.  M. Knuth [Opuntia imbricata (Haw.)
DC.], a cholla cactus, is used in Mexico as a “Tea taken to treat asthma. Tea used
against diarrhea (plant contains tannins).” (González Stuart 2004).
Fig. 4.71 Brasenia schreberi: (a) fol.49v; (b) B. schreberi. (Source: https://alchetron.com/
Brasenia-1963638-W)
Angiosperms
112
Fig. 4.72 Cylindropuntia sp.: (a) Fol. 99v#10; (b) Opuntia chaffey roots. (Source: Roberts and
Hill 2009)
Fol. 100v(3)#7, 101v(1)#9. Hylocereus undatus (Fig. 4.73)
Description These phytomorphs (Figs.  4.73a, b), which resemble an epiphytic
cactus, are most probably Hylocereus undatus (Haw.) Britton and Rose, the nightblooming cereus dragon fruit, or pitaya. Though today the segments are long and
bear pink fruit that is commercially marketed (Fig.  4.73c), in areas of deprived
moisture and nutrition (i.e., when grown as an epiphyte) the segments are much
shorter, with prominent glochids (Fig. 4.73d).
Distribution Native to the New World tropics.
Names Dragonfruit (English). Estrada Lugo (1989) identifies the teonochtli/teōnōchtli of fol. 17v in the Codex Cruz-Badianus as this species. The name accompanying the second phytomorph, odor, transliterates to āchāe, of unknown
translation.
Uses Useful in treating Type II diabetes (Song et al. 2016).
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
113
Fol. 100r#8. Opuntia sp., cf. O. ficus-indica (Fig. 4.74)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.74a) has the shape of a prickly pear cactus
pad or fruit, with areoles bearing leaf primordia and tiny fruits on the top edge, i.e.,
Opuntia sp., quite possibly Opuntia ficus-indica (L.) Mill., O. megacantha SalmDyck, or O. streptacantha Lem. (Dressler 1953). Today, Opuntia ficus-indica is
widely cultivated, but it is apparently native to central Mexico.
Distribution Native to Central Mexico and the Caribbean region, but presently
widely cultivated.
Names Prickly pear, cactus pear (English); called by the Nahuatl name anochtli
and tlatoc nochtli/tla-tōc-nōchtli in the Codex Cruz-Badianus (Emmart 1940;
Dressler 1953; Cruz and Badiano 1991; Gates 2000; Zepeda and White 2008;
Clayton et al. 2009; de Ávila Blomberg 2012). The name accompanying this phytomorph, soity, nāshtli, probably refers to the period pronunciation of the primary
name nochtli.
Fig. 4.73 Hylocereus undatus: (a) fol. 100v(3)#7; (b) fol. 101v(1)#9; (c) H. undatus. (Source: Bùi
Thụy Đào Nguyên CC BY-SA 3.0); (d) H. undatus grown as an epiphyte. (Source: Rhett Butler,
mongabay.com)
Angiosperms
114
Uses Edible fruit and leaves (cladodes). Nopalea cochenillifera (L.) Salm-Dyck
[O. cochenillifera (L.) Mill.] is also widely cultivated for the insect that is the source
for cochineal (Standley 1920–1926:863).
Fig. 4.74 Opuntia sp.: (a) fol. 100r#8; (b) cladode (pad) of O. ficus-indica with fruits. (Source:
Public domain)
Fol. 100v(3)#6. Pseudorhipsalis ramulosa (Fig. 4.75)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.75a), which resembles an epiphytic cactus,
is awash with blue pigment. A good fit is Pseudorhipsalis ramulosa (Salm-Dyck)
Bertholott), which is prominently pink in sunlight (Fig. 4.75b).
Distribution Native from Mexico to Peru.
Names Red mistletoe cactus, red rhipsalis (English).
Uses Unknown.
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
115
Fol. 28v. Selenicereus grandiflorus? (Fig. 4.76)
Description Figure 4.76a is perhaps the most alien-looking phytomorph in the
Voynich Codex. This seems to show a large white flower, perhaps unfinished,
attached to a tree or shrub stem. A comparable plant from reality would be a large
white blossom of an epiphytic cactus, such as Selenicereus grandlflorus (L.) Britton
& Rose (Fig. 4.76b).
Distribution Native to the Caribbean, Mexico, and Nicaragua.
Names Night-blooming cereus (English), organillo or reina de la noche (Spanish).
Uses Martinez (1969) discusses this species as valuable in rheumatism and diseases of the heart.
Fig. 4.75 Pseudorhipsalis ramulosa: (a) fol. 100v(3)#6; (b) P. ramulosa. (Source: TopTropicals.
com)
Angiosperms
116
Campanulaceae
Fol. 56v. Centropogon sp.? (Fig. 4.77)
Description The shape of the terminal flower in this phytomorph (Fig. 4.77a) indicates pollination by birds (ornithophily), most likely the Campanulaceae. Again, it
has probably been re-assembled from dried, fragmented specimens, so the sessile,
deeply serrate leaves and tuberous roots may not be accurate. Otherwise, this bears
resemblance to a Centropogon sp. (Fig. 4.77b).
Distribution Genus is native to Central and South America.
Names Unknown.
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.76 Selenicereus grandiflorus?: (a) fol. 28v; (b) S. grandiflorus. (Source: dé.wé. CC BY-SA 2.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
117
Caryophyllaceae
Fol. 24r. Silene sp. cf. S. menziesii Infected with Microbotryum violaceum
(Fig. 4.78)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.78a) is probably a Silene sp., but the crudeness of the image prevents accurate designation of a species. This phytomorph
might possibly be based, in part, on the variable species Silene menziesii Hook.
(Fig. 4.78b). The white flowers are a good match, even showing the typical infection
with the fungus Microbotryum violaceum (Pers.) G. Deml & Oberw., anther smut
fungus, which turns the anthers purple. However, the leaves are shown as hastate,
and C. menziesii has attenuate leaf bases. Is this another case of disparity of the
leaves between reality and portrayal, or is there another species of Silene that is a
better match to the illustration?
Distribution Native from Alaska to California and New Mexico (Morton 2005).
Names Menzies’ campion or Menzies’ catchfly (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.77 Centropogon sp.?: (a) fol. 56v; (b) Centropogon sp. (Source: Herbaria of Northwestern
Mexico CC BY-SA)
Angiosperms
118
Convolvulaceae
Fol. 1v + Fol. 101v(2)#4. Ipomoea arborescens (Fig. 4.79)
Description The phytomorph (Fig. 4.79a) shows a single leafy shoot with a single
terminal flower bud arising from a thick caudex. The flower bud has whitish sepals
and brownish petals; leaves are alternate, cordate, petiolate, green on the adaxial
Fig. 4.78 Silene sp.: (a) fol. 24r; (b, c) stems and inflorescence of S. menziesii. (Source: Robert
L. Carr); (d) flower infected with Microbotryum violaceum. (Source: Michael Hood)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
119
surface, and tan on the abaxial surface; coarse roots emanate from the basal caudex.
This phytomorph is repeated on fol. 101v(2)#4 (Fig.  4.79b). This illustration is
overwhelmingly similar in style and substance to xiuhamolli/xiuhhamolli (soap
plant) found in fol. 9r (Plate 11) in the 1552 Mexican Codex Cruz-Badianus, which
has been identified as Ipomoea murucoides Roem. & Schult. (Emmart 1940; Cruz
and Badiano 1991; Gates 2000; Clayton et al. 2009). Reko (1947) and Bye and
Linares (2013) also identify this as an Ipomoea sp. The flower bud of I. murucoides
(Fig. 4.79c) is similar. Phytomorphs in the Codex Cruz-Badianus and in the Voynich
Codex have a large, broad, gray to whitish basal caudex with ridged bark. However,
the leaves in the Voynich Codex are cordate rather than attenuate as observed in the
Cruz-Badianus Codex. The phytomorph in the Voynich Codex must then be Ipomoea
arborescens (Humb. & Bonpl. ex Willd.) G. Don (Fig. 4.79d), found from northern
to southern Mexico (Standley 1920–1926:1205) and commonly known in Nahuatl
as quauhtzahuat (Ocaranza 2011). Additional botanical characters of both species
are discussed by Austin et al. (2005), McPherson (1981) and Standley (1920–1926).
Curiously, McPherson described the bases of the leaves of I. murucoides as truncate, whereas Standley described the bases as rounded or obtuse, and they would be
better described as cuneate on all herbarium sheets of this species that we have seen.
Leaves of I. murucoides are described by McPherson as variously pubescent, while
the leaves of I. arborescens are usually tomentose, especially on the lower surface,
rendering the abaxial surface grey-green and the adaxial surface green. The tomentose abaxial surface often turns brownish green on drying, which is similar to that
of the phytomorph in the Voynich Codex.
Distribution Native to Mexico, originating in in the Sonoran Desert.
Names Morning glory tree (English); additional Spanish names for I. arborescens
include “‘Palo blanco’ (Sonora, Sinaloa); ‘palo del muerto,’ ‘casahuate,’ ‘quauhzahuatl,’ [Nahuatl] ‘casahuate blanco’ (Morelos); ‘palo santo’ (Sonora); ‘palo bobo’
(Morelos, El Salvador); ‘tutumushte,’ ‘siete pellejos,’ ‘siete camisas’ (El Salvador).”
(Standley 1920–1926:1205).
Uses The seeds of Ipomoea tricolor Cav. (I. violacea auct.) (Witters 1975) and the
related species Argyreia nervosa (Burm.f.) Bojer, a tropical wood rose, contain
d-lysergic acid amide (LSA), similar to LSD (Borsutsky et al. 2002; Miller 1970).
Species of Ipomoea are known for their resin glycosides and are used to counter
several diseases (Pereda-Miranda et al. 2010; Batres et al. 2012; Meira et al. 2012).
The ashes of the arborescent Ipomoea species, I. murucoides and I. arborescens,
are used to prepare soap and are also used in hair and skin care (Batres et al. 2012;
Standley 1920–1926:1205). Medicinal uses in Mexico are recorded by Martinez
(1969).
Angiosperms
120
Fol. 57r. Ipomoea nil (Fig. 4.80)
Description The phytomorph (Fig. 4.80a) has a terminal dark blue flower with a
white edge, acute petals, and elongated calyx lobes. Leaves are lobed peltate on an
herbaceous bush. Roots are brown and branched. This might match the variability
of Ipomoea nil (L.) Roth (Fig. 4.80b, c). The species is extremely variable, from
vine to herbaceous bush, with floral colors from blue to pink to white, but often with
a distinctive white edge. Leaves are often hastate but vary to palmately lobed.
Distribution Native from Mexico to Argentina.
Names Picotee morning glory, ivy morning glory, Japanese morning glory
(English). A Nahuatl name is acaquitl mecatl (Díaz 1976).
Uses The seeds of Ipomoea tricolor Cav. (I. violacea auct.) (Witters 1975) and the
related species Argyreia nervosa (Burm.f.) Bojer, a tropical wood rose, contain
d-lysergic acid amide (LSA), similar to LSD (Borsutsky et al. 2002; Miller 1970).
Species of Ipomoea are known for their resin glycosides and are used to counter
several diseases (Pereda-Miranda et al. 2010; Batres et al. 2012; Meira et al. 2012).
Fig. 4.79 Ipomoea arborescens: (a) fol. 1v; (b) I. murucoides from Codex Cruz-Badianus plate
11; (c) bud of I. murucoides. (Source: Kevin C. Nixon); (d); flower, fruits, and leaves of I. arborescens. (Source: Tony Rodd, CC BY-NC-SA 2.0); (e) fol. 101v(2)#4
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
121
Fol. 89v#12. Ipomoea plummerae var. cuneifolia (Fig. 4.81)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.81a) appears to be a desert Convolvulaceae,
and Ipomoea plummerae A.  Gray var. cuneifolia (A.  Gray) J.  F. Mabr. matches
rather well (Fig. 4.81b). A photo of the bulb of this taxon could not be located, but
Fig. 4.81c shows I. plummerae var. plummerae.
Distribution Native to the Gila Wilderness in Arizona and New Mexico.
Names Huachaua morning glory (English). The word accompanying this phytomorph, dasSeody, is transliterated as chonts/tzāchi. This may be derived from the
Nahuatl chonetl, demon, + zachi, to give a little bit more (Herrera 2004; Karttunen
1983; Siméon 2010).
Uses The seeds of Ipomoea tricolor Cav. (I. violacea auct.) (Witters 1975) and the
related species Argyreia nervosa (Burm.f.) Bojer, a tropical wood rose, contain
d-lysergic acid amide (LSA), similar to LSD (Borsutsky et al. 2002; Miller 1970).
Species of Ipomoea are known for their resin glycosides and are used to counter
several diseases (Pereda-Miranda et al. 2010; Batres et al. 2012; Meira et al. 2012).
Fig. 4.80 Ipomoea nil: (a) fol. 57r; (b, c) flowers and leaves of I. nil. (Source: Rare and Exotic
Seeds and Image by Ghost32 at ghost32writer.com, respectively)
Angiosperms
122
Fol. 32v, fol. 101v(3)#2. Ipomoea pubescens (Fig. 4.82)
Description Figure 4.82a, b show two phytomorphs. The blue flowers, deeply
lobed leaves, and tuberous roots are all good fits for (most probably) Ipomoea
pubescens Lam. (Fig. 4.82c).
Distribution Native from Arizona and New Mexico to Mexico, and also in Bolivia,
Peru, and Argentina.
Names Silky morning glory (English).
Uses The seeds of Ipomoea tricolor Cav. (I. violacea auct.) (Witters 1975) and
the related species Argyreia nervosa (Burm.f.) Bojer, a tropical wood rose, contain d-lysergic acid amide (LSA), similar to LSD (Borsutsky et al. 2002; Miller
1970). Species of Ipomoea are known for their resin glycosides and are used to
counter several diseases (Pereda-Miranda et al. 2010; Batres et al. 2012; Meira
et al. 2012).
Fig. 4.81 Ipomoea plummerae var. cuneifolia: (a) fol. 89v#12; (b) I. plummerae A. Gray var.
cuneifolia. (Source: Western New Mexico University Department of Natural Sciences and the Dale
A. Zimmerman Herbarium); (c) I. plummerae var. plummerae bulb. (Source: Russ Kleinman)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
123
Crassulaceae
Fol. 25v. Dudleya ingens (Fig. 4.83)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.83a) is a rosette of lanceolate green leaves.
Roots are ample but not tuberous. This is most probably a Dudleya sp., probably
D. ingens Johans. (Fig. 4.83b). Although not recognized as a myrmecophyte (a plant
associated with ants) (Díaz-Castelazo et al. 2004; Rico-Gray 1993), under cultivation, some Dudleya species are subject to severe ant infestations, which carry mealy
bugs. This would explain the carnivorous Mexican horned lizard, Phrynosoma
taurus Dugès, 1873, nibbling at the lower corner of the phytomorph.
Distribution Endemic to Baja California.
Names Baja liveforever (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.82 Ipomoea pubescens: (a) fol 32v; (b) fol. 101v(3)#2; (c) flower, leaf, and rhizome of
I. pubescens. (Source: Apostolou Starvos)
Angiosperms
124
Fol. 47r. Echeveria sp. (Fig. 4.84)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.84a) is a rosette of elliptic, finely crenate
leaves, along with an identical offset. Roots are ample but not tuberous. This bears
an uncanny resemblance to an Echeveria sp. No species of this genus of succulents
are truly crenate, but some are ruffled on the margin, such as the very variable E.
gibbiflora DC. (Fig. 4.84b).
Distribution E. gibbiflora is native from Mexico to Guatemala.
Names E. gibbiflora is callecd oreja de burro (Spanish).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.83 Dudleya ingens: (a) fol. 25v; (b) D. ingens. (Source: https://davesgarden.com/guides/pf/
go/94671)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
125
Dioscoreaceae
Fol. 17v. Dioscorea composita (Fig. 4.85)
Description Most probably this phytomorph (Fig. 4.85a) is Dioscorea composita
Hemsl. (Fig. 4.85b). The roots (Fig. 4.85c) are quite often segmented, as shown in
the Voynich Codex. The flowers are yellow when fresh but rust-colored upon drying,
and they are borne on a vine, fitting rather well, but the phytomorph is shown with
leaves more hastate than D. composita normally exhibits.
Distribution Native from southern Mexico to Costa Rica.
Names Barbasco (Spanish).
Uses Medicinal uses in Mexico are recorded by Martinez (1969). This is a source
of cortisone precursors (Correll et al. 1955).
Fig. 4.84 Echeveria sp.: (a) fol. 47r; (b) E. gibbiflora. (Source: http://www.myseeds.co/
echeveria-gibbiflora-ruffled-leaves-succulent-seeds)
Angiosperms
126
Fol. 96v. Dioscorea mexicana (Fig. 4.86)
Description The rust-colored flowers and sagittate leaves of the phytomorph
(Fig. 4.86a) fit rather well for Dioscorea mexicana Schweidw. (Fig. 4.86b, c).
Distribution This vine is native from northern to southern Mexico to Panama.
Names Cabeza de negro (Spanish), Mexican yam (English).
Uses Medicinal uses in Mexico are recorded by Martinez (1969). This is a source
of cortisone precursors (Correll et al. 1955).
Fig. 4.85 Dioscorea composita: (a) fol. 17v; (b) leaves and inflorescences of D. composita.
(Source: Abisaí García Mendoza, Institute of Biology, National Autonomous University of
Mexico); (c) segmented roots of D. composita. (Source: Ryan Somma, CC BY-SA 2.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
127
Fol. 99r#28. Dioscorea sp., cf. D. remotiflora (Fig. 4.87)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.87a) is most probably Dioscorea remotiflora
Kunth (Fig. 4.87b). The large, dark root resembles a paddle or bat (Fig. 4.87c, d).
The rust-colored flowers and cordate leaves on a vine also match.
Distribution Native from northern to southern Mexico.
Names Mountain yam (English). The name accompanying this phytomorph, tolsasy, tlācânoni, is Nahuatl for bat or paddle, which matches the long, tuberous root.
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.86 Dioscorea mexicana: (a) fol. 96v; (b) inflorescence and (c) rhizome of D. mexicana.
(Source: Michael Charters and The Smithsonian, respectively)
Angiosperms
128
Fig. 4.87 Dioscorea remotiflora: (a) fol. 99r#28; (b) herbarium sheet of D. remotiflora (F1405679).
(Source: The Field Museum); (c, d) bat- or paddle-like roots of D. remotiflora. (Source: Ignacio
Garcia Ruiz, PhytoImages.siu.edu)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
129
Ericaceae
Fol. 94v(2). Macleania insignis? (Fig. 4.88)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.88a) bears an overwhelming similarity to the
Ericaceae, with swollen corolla and opposite leaves on a shrub with ample roots.
The corolla is painted with blue and red paints. This might be Macleania insignis
M. Martens & Galeotti (Fig. 4.88b), which can form caudiciform lignotubers with
edible fruit on arching stems.
Distribution Native to cloud forests of Mexico, Costa Rica, and Colombia.
Names Unknown.
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.88 Macleania insignis: (a) fol. 94v(2); (b) M. insignis. (Source: https://farm1.staticflickr.
com/390/19231071609_30b076d1d1_b.jpg)
Fol. 94v(3). Vaccinium caespitosum? (Fig. 4.89)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.89a) is most probably an alpine, stoloniferous shrub with elliptic, acute leaves. The campanulate flowers, painted with blue
pigment, resemble the Ericaceae, and a guess might be Vaccinium caespitosum
Michx. (Fig. 4.89b).
Distribution Native from California to Mexico.
Names Sierra bilberry (English).
Uses Moerman (1998) discusses the culinary value of this species for the Alaska
Native, Gosiute, and Hanaksiaia.
Angiosperms
130
Euphorbiaceae
Fol. 6v. Cnidoscolus texanus (Fig. 4.90)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.90a) has palmately compound leaves and
trichomes on the fruit and matches a Cnidoscolus sp. Both C. chayamansa McVaugh
and C. aconitifolius (Mill.) I.M. Johnst. are called chaya and widely cultivated from
Mexico to Nicaragua; the leaves are matches (Ross-Ibarra and Molina-Cruz 2002).
However, these cultivated species have relatively smooth fruits, and a closer correspondence would be C. texanus (Müll. Arg.) Small (Fig. 4.90b, c), which has fruits
that are coated with trichomes.
Distribution Native to the United States (Texas, Arkansas, Kansas, Lousiana,
Oklahoma) and northern Mexico.
Names Texas bullnettle, treadsoftly (English), mala mulher (Spanish).
Uses Causes intense pain upon contact (Pollard 1986).
Fig. 4.89 Vaccinium caespitosum?: (a) fol. 94v(3); (b) V. caespitosum. (Source: Jane S. Richardson
CC BY 3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
131
Fol. 20r. Euphorbia chamaesula? (Fig. 4.91)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.91a) is similar to both fols. 4r and 20r; while
it is overwhelmingly similar to a Euphorbia sp. (Chamaesyce sp.), the inflorescence
is a simple, non-foliar raceme, unlike the other species in this genus. The simplest
explanation, agreeing with other phytomorphs, is that it was incorrectly re-assembled
from fragmented dried specimens. If the arrangement of the inflorescence is ignored,
this might be E. chamaesula Boiss. (Fig. 4.91b).
Distribution Native from Arizona and New Mexico to Mexico.
Names Mountain spurge (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this genus is discussed by Moerman (1998).
Fig. 4.90 Cnidoscolus sp.: (a) fol. 6v; (b) fruits of C. texanus with trichomes. (Source: Carl Fabre,
Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center); (c) leaves and flower of C. texanus. (Source: Tiana
Rehman, Botanical Research Institute of Texas)
Angiosperms
132
Fol. 4r. Euphorbia glyptosperma? (Fig. 4.92)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.92a) has small, green-to-red entire leaves.
The terminal capsules are quite characteristic of a Euphorbia sp. (Chamaesyce sp.).
This might be E. glyptosperma Engelm. [Chamaesyce glyptosperma (Engelm.)
Small] (Fig. 4.92b).
Distribution Native to Quebec, west to British Columbia, south to New Mexico.
Names Ridge-seed spurge (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this genus is discussed by Moerman (1998).
Fig. 4.91 Euphorbia chamaesula?: (a) fol. 20r; (b) E. chamaesula. (Source: SEINet Arizona-New
Mexico Chapter CC BY-SA)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
133
Fol. 7v. Euphorbia nutans? (Fig. 4.93)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.93a) is almost entirely vegetative, with serrate,
elliptic, primarily opposite leaves with an acute tip, with color light green to green to
orange. The limited inflorescence of three flowers has a pale calyx and darker corolla.
The roots are small. The distinguishing character, however, is the brown-to-black spot
in the center of the leaves. This might match a member of the Euphorbiaceae, such as
Euphorbia nutans Lag. [Chamaesyce nutans (Lag.) Small] (Fig. 4.93b). The wide
geographical range of this species accounts for its high variability, with leaf tips
ranging from obtuse to acute and variation in spots.
Fig. 4.92 Euphorbia glyptosperma?: (a) fol. 4r; (b) E. glyptosperma. (Source: Photo ©Al
Schneider, http://www.swcoloradowildflowers.com)
Angiosperms
134
Fol. 21r. Euphorbia thymifolia (Fig. 4.94)
Description The spreading growth pattern, tiny green to reddish leaves, and reddish axillary flowers of this phytomorph (Fig. 4.94a) are a good fit for Euphorbia
thymifolia L. [Chamaesyce thymifolia (L.) Millsp.] (Fig. 4.94b).
Distribution Native to the tropics in Africa, Asia, and the Americas (Florida to
Argentina).
Names Golondrina (Spanish); chickenweed (English).
Uses Popular medicinal herb; leaves, seeds and fresh juice of the whole plant are
used in worm infections, in bowel complaints, and in many more diseases therapeutically (Mali and Panchal 2013).
Fig. 4.93 Euphorbia nutans?: (a) fol. 7v; (b) E. nutans. (Source: Dr. James Van Kley, Stephen
F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches, Texas)
Distribution Native from the eastern United States to Venezuela.
Names Nodding spurge (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this genus is discussed by Moerman (1998).
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
135
Fol. 5v. Jatropha cathartica (Fig. 4.95)
Description The appropriate identification for this phytomorph (Fig. 4.95a) is
most probably Jatropha cathartica Terán & Berland., jicamilla (Fig.  4.95b).
The palmately compound dentate leaves, red flowers, and tuberous roots are
similar. Another similar species is J. podagrica Hook., native from southern
Mexico to Nicaragua, but the leaflets are typically broader and not as deeply cut as
J. cathartica.
Distribution Native from Texas to northern Mexico.
Names Jicamilla (Spanish), Berlandier’s nettlespurge (English).
Uses Cathartic and poisonous, as the specific name implies.
Fig. 4.94 Euphorbia thymifolia: (a) fol. 21r; (b) E. thymifolia. (Source: Forest and Kim Starr, CC
BY-NC-SA 3.0)
Angiosperms
136
Fol. 36r. Jatropha gossypifolia (Fig. 4.96)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.96a) has small, inferior eight-petaled flowers
that are painted bluish. Leaves are palmately lobed, on a small shrub. The roots are
substantial. This matches the variability of Jatropha gossypifolia L. (Fig. 4.96b).
Distribution Native to Mexico, Caribbean to South America, and (curiously) India.
Names Names include Frailecillo (Costa Rica, Cuba, Venezuela, Colombia);
frailejón, purge de frail (Colombia); túatúa (Venezuela, Santo Domingo, Puerto
Rico, Cuba); San Juan del Cobre (Cuba); and higuereta cimarrona (Puerto Rico)
(Standley 1920–1926); bellyache bush, black physicnut, and cotton-leaf physicnut
(English).
Uses Standley (1920–1926) records for Mexico: “The seeds are eaten by doves and
domestic fowl. They contain much oil and have drastic purgative and emetic properties. A decoction of the leaves is employed as a blood purifier and for venereal diseases, and is administered as an emetic for pains in the stomach. The root has some
repute as an antidote for snake bites and as a remedy for the poison of manchineel
(Hippomane mancinella).” Ayensu (1981) records for this species: “Leaf teas for diarrhoea, heat, venereal diseases, indigestion. Leaf baths for rash, bewitchment; poultices for sores, bich, piles…Decoction of boiled leaves as purgative. Leaves steeped in
cold water for cooling off. Diarrhoea: leaves boiled and tea drunk; also for fever and
for prickly heat in babies. Infant diarrhoea: leaf heated in water. Leaf decoction: stomach ache, laxative, throat inflammation, venereal sores in men, diabetes, gall bladder,
bathing wounds. Roots with leaves of Crescentia cujete and Croton flavens for colds.
Root decoction: sore throat, diabetes. Root boiled, salad oil added for stomach ache
Fig. 4.95 Jatropha cathartica: (a) fol. 5v; (b) J. cathartica. (Source: Frank Vincentz, CC
BY-NC-SA 3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
137
and bloody stool…Sores: mashed fresh leaves or powdered baked leaves applied.
Cutting teeth: fruits crushed, boiled, and given to infant…Sap from stem for cuts and
wounds. Clean scraped stem as rectal suppository for baby when bowels have not
moved. Asthma: flowering tips boiled with 7 raw coffee beans. Tea for laxative; purge,
constipation. Seeds purgative. Leaf tea to wash sores and ulcers.” Asprey and Thornton
(1953, 1954) record for this species: “Most of the old writers speak of the use of the
leaves of this plant, either in decoction or boiled like spinach, as a purgative remedy
for ‘dry belly-ache.’ Beckwith says it is used to prepare tea for constipation, the part
used not being specified but it is probably the leaves, as given in the old remedies.
The seeds are said to be purgative, the oil being similar to castor oil.” Martinez
(1969) also records medicinal uses for this species, including “para males venéreos.”
The medicinal value of this species is also discussed by Félix-Silva et al. (2014).
Fig. 4.96 Jatropha gossypifolia: (a) fol. 36r; (b) J. gossypifolia. (Source: Sue Carnahan, CC
BY-SA)
Fol. 93v. Manihot rubricaulis (Fig. 4.97)
Description The stout, thickened roots, palmately compound leaves, and reddish
fruits of this phytomorph (Fig. 4.97a) all fit the genus Manihot. This phytomorph is
most probably Manihot rubricaulis I. M. Johnst. (Fig. 4.97b). This close relative to
the cassava, M. esculenta Crantz, has thinner, more deeply lobed leaves; it also
bears tuberous roots (Hancock 2012).
Distribution Native to northern Mexico.
Names Manihot rubricaulis is perhaps discussed in fol. 43v of the Codex CruzBadianus as yamanquipatlis (gentle or weak medicine) (Emmart 1940; Cruz and
Badian 1991; Gates 2000; Clayton et al. 2009). It is also perhaps illustrated as
ytzticpatli in Hernández et al. (1651:116).
Uses Potential source of cold tolerance for cassava.
Angiosperms
138
Fol. 16r. Manihot pringlei (Fig. 4.98)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.98a) has deeply lobed leaves, probably
compound. The inflorescence is leafy and reddish. The roots are swollen. This is
similar to fol. 93v, Manihot rubricaulis, but probably M. pringlei S.  Watson
(Fig. 4.98b)
Distribution Native to Mexico.
Names Yuca, matorral (Tamaulipas, Mexico) (Standley 1920–1926).
Uses Unknown
Fig. 4.97 Manihot rubricaulis: (a) fol. 93v; (b) leaf of M. rubricaulis. (Source: Sky Jacobs,
wildsonora.com); (c) tubers of M. esculenta. (Source: David Monniaux, CC BY-SA 3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
139
Fabaceae
Fol. 88r#11. Lupinus sp., cf. L. montanus (Fig. 4.99)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.99a) displays stylized compound peltate
leaves and callus-like, nitrogen-fixing root nodules on one side of the roots. Many
members of the Fabaceae have nitrogen-fixing nodules, but none have leaves exactly
as depicted. Although the image is crudely rendered, it may possibly be Lupinus
montanus Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth (Fig. 4.99b). The compound peltate leaves and
soft, callus-like, nitrogen-fixing root nodules on one side of the roots (Fig. 4.99c)
are all typical of this species.
Distribution Mexico and Central America.
Names Garbancillo (Spanish). The name accompanying this phytomorph, opaldo,
āhuocâchā, might be derived from agua (water)  +  cacha (Nahuatl), callus; the
nitrogen-fixing root nodules do resemble watery calluses.
Uses This lupine is noted to contain alkaloids (Dunn and Harmon 1977; Ruiz-López
et al. 2010).
Fig. 4.98 Manihot pringlei: (a) fol. 16r; (b) M. pringlei. (Source: The Field Museum, CC-BY-NC)
Angiosperms
140
Geraniaceae
Fol. 101r#1. Geranium tenue? (Fig. 4.100)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.100a) bears alternate, deeply lobed, palmate
leaves. The roots indicate a rhizome. This may be Geranium tenue Hanks
(Fig. 4.100b).
Distribution Native to Mexico.
Names The name accompanying this phytomorph, sair aly, might be transliterated as noshe ocai or noche icai, Nahuatl for induces night (Herrera 2004; Karttunen
1983; Siméon 2010).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.99 Lupinus sp.: (a) fol. 88r#7; (b) L. montanus. (Source: Harry Douwes); (c) root nodules
on L. montanus. (Source: Therrell et al. 2006)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
141
Gesneriaceae
Fol. 55r. Diastema hispidum (Fig. 4.101)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.101a) has six petals that are white and bluish,
and a long corolla. Leaves are green and deeply lobed. Multiple stems arise from a
rhizomatous base, with many brown roots. This might possibly be a species of
Geranium, but the swollen fruits seem incongruous with this genus; a better match
might be Diastema hispidum (DC.) Fritsch. (Fig. 4.101b, c).
Distribution Native from Nicaragua to Peru.
Names Unknown.
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.100 Gernanium tenue?: (a) fol. 101r#1; (b) G. tenue herbarium sheet. (Source: SEINet
Arizona-New Mexico Chapter, CC BY-SA)
Angiosperms
142
Grossulariaceae
Fol. 37v. Ribes cereum (Fig. 4.102)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.102a) has opposite orbicular, peltate
leaves with a crenate margin. Worldwide, except for Hydrocotyle and Tropaeolum
spp., there are no species that match the foliage of this phytomorph, and when
the inferior ovary and eight petals are added to the description, nothing matches.
Obviously, artistic license was taken, and it might have been created from dried
specimens. The only species that comes close to this description is Ribes cereum
Douglas (Fig. 4.102b), the flowers of which range from white to pink. Fruit is
typically red but blackens upon drying. Leaves are crenate and lightly lobed,
with the cordate bases often overlapping on drying. This is also a shrub with
substantial roots.
Fig. 4.101 Diastema hispidum: (a) fol. 55r; (b) flower of D. hispidum. (Source: Leslie Brothers);
(c) herbarium sheet of D. hispidum (F1836367), showing thin rhizomatous roots. (Source: The
Field Museum, CC-BY-NC)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
143
Distribution Ranges from British Columbia to California, east to Oklahoma.
Names Wax currant (English).
Uses Moerman (1998) discusses the culinary and medicinal value of this species
by the Navajo and Hopi.
Fig. 4.102 Ribes cereum: (a) fol. 37v; (b) R. cereum. (Source: http://www.wildflowerchild.info/
large/wax_currant2.jpg)
Fol. 23r. Ribes malvaceum (Fig. 4.103)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.103a) is most probably Ribes malvaceum
Sm. (Fig. 4.103b, c). This woody, stoloniferous shrub has purple-magenta flowers
and palmately lobed leaves.
Distribution Native from California to Baja Norte, Mexico (Standley
1920–1926:316).
Names Chaparral currant (English).
Uses Unknown.
Angiosperms
144
Fol. 95v. Ribes montigenum? (Fig. 4.104)
Distribution This phytomorph (Fig. 4.104a) is most probably a stoloniferous, alpine
shrub. The flowers, painted with a blue pigment, superficially could be Asteraceae,
but the general gestalt of the whole plant is Grossulariaceae. A guess might be Ribes
montigenum McClatchie (Fig. 4.104b).
Distribution Native from Canada to California, Arizona, and New Mexico.
Names Mountain gooseberry (English).
Uses The medicinal value of this genus is discussed by Moerman (1998).
Fig. 4.103 Ribes malvaceum: (a) fol. 23r; (b) flower and (c) shoots of R. malvaceum. (Source:
Stan Shebs, CC BY-SA 3.0 and Toedrifter, CC BY-SA 3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
145
Lamiaceae
Fol. 45v. Hyptis albida (Fig. 4.105)
Description The gray leaves, blue flowers, and stout root in this phytomorph
(Fig.  4.105a) are all good fits for most probably Hyptis albida Kunth
(Fig. 4.105b, c), now sometimes classified as Condea albida (Kunth) Harley and
J.F.B. Pastore.
Distribution This shrub is native from Sonora and Chihuahua to San Luis Potosí,
Guanajuato, and Guerrero.
Names Orégano (Spanish); desert lavender (English).
Uses Standley (1920–1926:1275) relates that “The leaves are sometimes used for
flavoring food. In Sinaloa they are employed as a remedy for ear-ache, and in Guerrero
a decoction of the plant is used in fomentations to relieve rheumatic pains.”
Fig. 4.104 Ribes montigenum?: (a) fol. 95v; (b) R. montigenum. (Source: PhytoImages.siu.edu)
Angiosperms
146
Fol. 32r. Ocimum campechianum (Fig. 4.106)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.103a) is most probably Ocimum campechianum Mill. (O. micranthum Willd.) (Fig. 4.106b). The terminal inflorescence, bluish
flowers, and ovate leaves are all good fits (Standley 1920–1926:1272).
Distribution This suffrutescent plant is native from Florida to Argentina; in
Mexico it is found from Sinaloa to Tamaulipas, Yucatán, and Colima (Standley and
Williams 1973:269).
Names Wild sweet basil, least basil (English).
Uses Standley (1920–1926:1272) relates “In El Salvador bunches of the leaves of
this plant are put in the ears as a remedy for earache.”
Fig. 4.105 Hyptis albida: (a) fol. 45v; (b, c) inflorescence of H. albida. (Source: Benjamin Wilder,
Desert Laboratory on Tumamoc Hill, University of Arizona and Jim Conrad, respectively)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
147
Fol. 45r. Salvia cacaliifolia (Fig. 4.107)
Description In this phytomorph (Fig. 4.107a), blue flowers are in a tripartite inflorescence, and distantly dentate deltoid-hastate leaves are quite characteristic of
Salvia cacaliifolia Benth. (Fig. 4.107b).
Distribution Native from Mexico (Chiapas) to Guatemala and Honduras (Standley
and Williams 1973:278).
Names Guatamalan blue sage (English).
Uses Ornamental.
Fig. 4.106 Ocimum campechianum: (a) fol. 32r; (b) inflorescence and leaves of O. campechianum.
(Source: Roger L. Hammer)
Angiosperms
148
Fol. 100r#5. Scutellaria mexicana (Fig. 4.108)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.108a) shows three flowers that match to
Scutellaria mexicana (Torr.) A.J. Paton (Salazaria mexicana Torr.) (Fig. 4.108b, c).
Inflated bladder-like calyces vary in color, depending upon maturity, from green to
white to magenta, with a dark blue and white corolla emerging from it (Standley
1920–1926:1271).
Distribution This shrub is native from Utah to Mexico (Baja California, Chihuahua,
and Coahuila).
Names The name accompanying this phytomorph is sar cear daiin dy, which
transliterates to noe, moe-choll-chi. This includes the Spanish cholla, skeleton or
skull, plus the Nahuatl root word for owl, chi (chi:chtli or chi:cuahtli is owl, chicuatli
is the barn or screech owl). The calyces do resemble the skull of the great horned owl
(Fig. 4.108d). This species also seems to match the description of tenamaznanapoloa
(carrying triplets?) of Hernández et al. (1651:129) (alias tenamazton or tlalamatl).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.107 Salvia cacaliifolia: (a) fol. 45r; (b) inflorescence and leaves of S. cacaliifolia.
(Source: Ashwood Nurseries Ltd)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
149
Fol. 52r. Teucrium laciniatum (Fig. 4.109)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.109a), apparently in bud, whitish with bluish lines, bears resemblance to the Lamiaceae, with a terminal inflorescence on a
woody subshrub. Leaves are four per node and palmately lobed at the tips. Roots are
rhizomatous and ample, not tuberous. Assuming that this was assembled from dried
specimens, it matches the variability of Teucrium laciniatum Torr. (Fig. 4.109b).
Flowers are white with purple lines in the throat.
Distribution Native from Colorado to Mexico.
Names Lacy germander (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.108 Scutellaria mexicana: (a) fol. 100r#5; (b) inflorescence of S. mexicana. (Courtesy of
Wynn Anderson); (c) skull of the great horned owl. (Source: http://www.connecticutvalleybiological.com/great-horned-owl-skull-bubo-virginianus-p-13913.html)
Angiosperms
150
Liliaceae
Fol. 55v. Clintonia andrewsiana (Fig. 4.110)
Description The flowers of this phytomorph (Fig.  4.110a), apparently of the
Liliaceae, are painted with blue pigment. Leaves are broadly elliptic and basal,
margin entire. Roots are ample but not tuberous or bulbous. This matches the genus
Clintonia very well, probably C. andrewsiana Torr. (Fig. 4.110b).
Distribution Native from Oregon to California.
Names Red bead lily or western bluebead-lily (English).
Uses Moerman (1998) says: “Pomo Poison Plant considered poisonous.”
Fig. 4.109 Teucrium laciniatum: (a) fol. 52r; (b) T. laciniatum. (Source: Richard Spellenberg,
CC BY-NC-SA 3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
151
Malvaceae
Fol. 102r#11. Chiranthodendron pentadactylon (Fig. 4.111)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.111a) is very curious, looking more like a
very dark, blue-black flag than a possible plant part. However, this is often the
appearance of the five-parted stamens of Chiranthodendron pentadactylon Larreat.
(C. platanoides Bonpl.) when they are pressed and dried. When fresh, the stamens
are a brilliant vermillion (Fig. 4.111b), but they turn blue-black when improperly
dried and/or aged (Fig. 4.111c), and the five-parted, hand-like stamens can assume
a flag-like figure when pressed.
Distribution This species typically grows in wet areas in the mountains of
Oaxaca and Guatemala but is widely planted in the Valley of Mexico (Standley
1920–1926).
Names This is called macpalxochi quahuitl in Hernández et  al. (1651:383, 459)
(Reko 1947; Safford 1912). It may be the same as teonacaztli/ueinacaztli (sacred ear)
in pl. 420 and 686 and ueinacaztli/ueynacaztli in Sahagún’s Florentine Codex (Estrada
Lugo 1989). Additional Nahuatl names are mapasúchil, mapilxochitl, and teyacua
(Díaz 1976); mapasúchil is derived from the Nahuatl macpal-xochitl, “hand flower”
(Standley 1920–1926). Monkey’s hand tree (English). The name accompanying this
phytomorph, okoroeey, transliterates to ātlāeāăăi, with an unknown meaning.
Fig. 4.110 Clintonia andrewsiana: (a) fol. 55v; (b) C. andrewsiana. (Source: David A. Hofmann)
Angiosperms
152
Uses Medicinal uses in Mexico are recorded by Martinez (1969). It has been
documented to have antiprotozoal, antibacterial, and antidiarrheal properties and to
be antisecretory (Calzada et al. 2017; Velázquez et al. 2009).
Fig. 4.111 Chiranthodendron pentadactylon: (a) fol. 102r#11; (b) five-parted stamens of C. pentadactylon. (Source: Jan Conayne); (c) dried shoot of C. pentadactylon showing leaves and flower
with protruding stamens. (Source: George B. Hinton Herbarium, CC BY 4.0)
Fol. 19v. Melochia tomentosa (Fig. 4.112)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.112a) has abundant green, serrate, hastate
leaves on a shrubby plant with obvious but minimal roots. Flowers are towards
the summit and painted bluish, with two lobes of the actinomorphic corolla visible.
The best match is Melochia tomentosa L. (Fig. 4.112b).
Distribution Ranges from Texas to Brazil and the West Indies and is very variable
(Goldberg 1967).
Names Teabush (English); Spanish names include malvisco (Puerto Rico);
bretónica (Puerto Rico, Venezuela); and malva and varita de San José (Nicaragua)
(Standley 1920–1926).
Uses Ayensu (1981) records for this species: “Tea for colds; boil roots for decoction
for back pain.” Asprey and Thornton (1953, 1954) record for this species: “Used to
make tea for colds.” Encarcion Dimayuga et al. (1987) also record its use for colds in
Baja California Sur. Mayans today use an infusion of the leaves to hasten delivery
(Roys 1976).
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
153
Marantaceae
Fol. 42v. Calathea sp., cf. C. loeseneri (Fig. 4.113)
Description The phytomorph inflorescence (Fig. 4.113a) is a crude representation of
a Calathea sp., probably allied to C. loeseneri J.F. Macbr. (Fig. 4.113b). Many species
of Calathea were recently transferred to the genus Goeppertia, and a synonym of this
species is now G. loeseneri (J.F. Macbr.) Borschs. & Suárez (Borschenius et al. 2012).
The crudeness of the illustration, coupled with inadequate surveys of the genus
Calathea/Goeppertia in Mexico, prevent precise identification.
Distribution Native to tropical America, including Peru, Brazil, Colombia,
Ecuador, and Bolivia.
Names Genus called calathea or prayer plant (English).
Uses Calathea loesneri yields a blue dye; in a related species in Peru (C. standleyi
J. F. Macbr.), this is used to ward off dental caries (Graham et al. 2004).
Fig. 4.112 Melochia tomentosa: (a) fol. 19v; (b) inflorescence. (Source: Joseph A. Marcus, Lady
Bird Johnson Wildflower Center)
Angiosperms
154
Menyanthaceae
Fol. 2v. Nymphoides aquatica. (Fig. 4.114)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.114a) has a rounded, notched leaf, four
white petals with a crenate margin, and a thick rhizome. It closely resembles
Nymphoides aquatica (J.F. Gmel.) (Fig. 4.114b), with five wide, crenulated petals.
The horizontal rhizome bears thick, unbranched, adventitious roots that in young
plants resemble a bunch of bananas (Richards et al. 2010), earning it the popular
name, banana plant. Another possibility is N. indica (L.) Kuntze, but the petals are
narrower and fimbriated in this species (Fig. 4.114c).
Distribution Nymphoides aquatica is native to the southern United States, from New
Jersey to Texas; N. indica is native to southern Mexico (Campeche, Chiapas, Oaxaca,
Quintana Roo, Tabasco, Veracruz, Yucatan) but also Asia, Africa, and Australia.
Names Nymphoides aquatica: banana plant, banana lily, big floating heart;
N. indica: banana plant, robust marshwort, and water snowflake (English).
Uses Aquarium plant.
Fig. 4.113 Calathea sp.: (a) fol. 42v; (b) inflorescence and leaves of C. loeseneri. (Source: Milan
Kořínek)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
155
Moraceae
Fol. 36v. Dorstenia contrajerva (Fig. 4.115)
Description The inflorescence (Fig.  4.115a), appearing like a split-open fig, is
quite distinct and matches most probably a Dorstenia sp., likely the very variable
D. contrajerva L. (Fig. 4.115b). Leaves for this species vary “in spirals, rosulate or
spaced; lamina broadly ovate to cordiform to subhastate, pinnately to subpalmately
or subpedately, variously lobed to parted with 3–8 lobes at each side or subentire”
(Berg 2001).
Distribution Native from Mexico to Peru.
Names The Nahuatl name is tozpatli or tuzpatli (Díaz 1976); snakewort (English).
Uses The specific epithet contrajerva, the Latinized form of Spanish contrahierba,
suggests its use for treating poisoning and venomous bites and stings. Medicinal
uses in Mexico are recorded by Martinez (1969).
Fig. 4.114 Nymphoides aquatica: (a) fol. 2v; (b) N. aquatica. (Source: Center for Aquatic and
Invasive plants, University of Florida, Gainesville); (c) N. indica. (Source: Edward Jaser, CC
BY-SA 3.0)
Angiosperms
156
Fol. 14v. Dorstenia lindeniana (Fig. 4.116)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.116a) is overwhelmingly similar to fol. 36v,
which has been identified as a Dorstenia sp. However, this phytomorph has serrated
simple leaves, not deeply lobed compound leaves. This might fall within the variability of D. lindeniana Bureau in DC (Fig. 4.116b).
Distribution Native to Mexico. Guatemala, and Belize (Berg 2001).
Names Unknown.
Uses Used medicinally by the Maya for skin problems, being anti-inflammatory
(Hitziger 2016; Walshe-Roussel 2014.). Further chemistry and pharmacology are
explored by Ngadjui and Abegaz (2003).
Fig. 4.115 Dorstenia contrajerva: (a) fol. 36v; (b) botanical image of D. contrajerva by Pierre
Turpin from Chaumeton (1830:131)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
157
Nelumbonaceae
Fol. 101(2)#3. Nelumbo lutea (Fig. 4.117)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.117a) has a very slightly crenate margin on
the leaf, peltate attachment of the petiole, and a substantial root with aerenchyma.
With the peltate attachment and aerenchyma, this can match only a Nelumbo sp.,
such as N. lutea (Willd.) Pers. (Fig. 4.117b).
Distribution Native from Canada to Honduras and the Caribbean.
Names American lotus (English).
Uses Often a food plant (Swan 2010).
Fig. 4.116 Dorstenia lindeniana: (a) fol. 14v; (b) D. lindeniana shoots. (Source: The Field Museum)
Angiosperms
158
Nymphaeaceae
Fol. 89v(1)#6. Nymphaea ampla (Fig. 4.118)
Description This phytomorph shows a leaf that is orbicular and deeply notched,
with attachment of the petiole at the center. The margin is hairy or deeply serrated.
Roots are ample. This might match Nymphaea ampla (Salisb.) DC. (Fig. 4.118a)
(Conard 1905; Wiersema et al. 2008).
Distribution Mayan lowlands in southern Mexico.
Names The name accompanying this phytomorph, opoldaiin, transliterates to
āhu/guācacholl, which may be derived from the Spanish agua + Nahuatl cacçolli,
or watery hardness (Herrera 2004; Karttunen 1983; Siméon 2010), perhaps alluding
to its use in treating kidney stones. White water lily (English).
Uses This is rich in psychoactive apomorphine alkaloids and currently is being
investigated to treat erectile dysfunction (Bertol et al. 2004; Dobkin de Rios 1974;
Díaz 1977; Emboden 1979, 1981a, b, 1982a, b, 1983; McDonald and Stross 2012;
Rands 1953).
Fig. 4.117 Nelumbo lutea: (a) fol. 101(2)#3; (b) N. lutea leaf. (Source: john clintoneasywildflowers.com); (c) N. lutea root. (Source: Mark “Merriwether” Vorderbruggen, Ph.D., www.foragingtexas.com)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
159
Nyctaginaceae
Fol. 33r. Allionia incarnata (Fig. 4.119)
Description This has many petals united into a greenish corolla, backed by a swollen, whitish calyx, with sagittate, green leaves, and swollen, branched brown roots
(Fig. 4.119a). This matches the wide variability of Allionia incarnata L. (Fig. 4.119b,
c). Curiously, the ends of the two main roots in the phytomorph in the Voynich
Codex have a face, and the roots of Allionia incarnata do bear bumps with indentations that could be interpreted as tiny faces.
Distribution Native from Utah to Mexico.
Names Hierba de la hormiga (ant herb), hierba del golpe (knock herb) (Spanish);
four o’clock, trailing windmills (English).
Uses Moerman (2009) reports that A. incarnata is used by the Ramah Navajo as a
dermatological aid, a cold infusion used as a lotion for swellings.
Fig. 4.118 Nymphaea ampla: (a) fol. 89v(1)#6; (b) N. ampla. (Source: Reinhard Jahn CC BY-SA
2.0 DE)
Angiosperms
160
Onagraceae
Fol. 51r. Fuchsia thymifolia (Fig. 4.120)
Description The phytomorph (Fig. 4.120a) has four red petals and four pale sepals
backed by a corolla tube and a swollen ovary; the leaves are green and deeply serrate; the roots are brown and tuberous. This may be Fuchsia thymifolia Kunth
(Fig. 4.120b).
Distribution Native from Mexico to Guatemala.
Names Thyme-leaved fuchsia (English). This species may also be in Sahagún’s
Florentine Codex as tlacozazalic (Estrada Lugo 1989).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.119 Allionia incarnata: (a) fol. 33r; (b) inflorescence and leaves of A. incarnata. (Source:
Campbell and Lynn Loughmiller, Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center); (c) herbarium specimen
of A. incarnata (DES00067664) showing the swollen, knobby roots. (Source: Desert Botanical
Garden Herbarium Collection)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
161
Passifloraceae
Fol. 101v(1)#15. Passiflora coriacea (Fig. 4.121)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.121a) has unique, obdeltoid leaves with
three dark blue berries. The most obvious choice is the bat-leaved passion flower,
Passiflora coriacea Juss. (Fig. 4.121b), probably assembled from dried fragments.
Distribution Native from Mexico to Bolivia.
Names Wild sweet calabash, bat-leaved passion flower (English). This is the same
species discussed by Francisco Hernández under the Nahuatl name tzinacanatlapatli (Hernández et al. 1651:435).
Uses Roys (1976) records from an unpublished manuscript on Mayan herbal medicine (Yerbas y Hechicherias del Yucatan), “The root of the escorzonera, which in
this language they call xik-zoɔ or in ours, sorrel, is crushed, and its juice or milk is
applied with some cotton to the eye. It is a tried remedy.” Further names and medicinal uses by the Huastecs are recorded by Alcorn (1984).
Fig. 4.120 Fuchsia thymifolia: (a) fol. 51r; (b) leaves and flowers of F. thymifolia. (Source: Todd
Boland)
Angiosperms
162
Fol. 23v. Passiflora Subgenus Decaloba, cf. P. morifolia (Fig. 4.122)
Description From the flower alone, this is definitely a Passiflora sp. of subgenus
Decaloba (Fig. 4.122a). Passiflora is primarily a New World genus, with a few species
also occurring in Australia and Southeast Asia, but none in Europe. The prominent corona
with filaments of the genus Passiflora is very distinctive and cannot be confused with any
other genus. The paired petiolar glands in the upper third of the leaf, blue tints in the
flower, and dentate leaves that are deeply cordate only seem to match the variability of P.
morifolia Mast. (Killip 1938) (Fig. 4.122b, c), although the artist has made the leaves
slightly more orbicular than is normal in mature foliage. Young plants (i.e., root suckers),
however, often exhibit juvenile leaves that are orbicular, entire leaves.
Distribution Passiflora is primarily a New World genus with a few species in
Australasia.
Names Blue sweet calabash, woodland passion flower (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.121 Passiflora coriacea: (a) fol. 101v(1)#15; (b) P. coriacea. (Source: https://www.ebay.
com/itm/passiflora-coriacea-collectors-bat-wing-rare-passion-flower-5-seeds-/321520705556)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
163
Penthoraceae
Fol. 30v. Penthorum sedoides (Fig. 4.123)
Description The cymose inflorescence, dentate leaves, and stolons of this phytomorph (Fig. 4.123a) match Penthorum sedoides L. (Fig. 4.123b, c) quite well. The
artist has apparently illustrated this in very early bud (or glossed over the details of
the flowers), however, because prominent pistils emerge later and are very obvious
in fruit, often turning rosy.
Distribution Native from Canada to Texas.
Names Ditch stonecrop (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.122 Passiflora sp.: (a) fol 23v; (b) flower of P. morifolia. (Source: Anke and Ralf Schlosser);
(c) leaf showing petiolar gland of P. morifolia. (Source: Hans B., CC BY-SA 3.0)
Angiosperms
164
Poaceae
Fol. 101v(1)#4. Zea sp.? (Fig. 4.124)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.124a) has a broad green blade and a terminal
brownish inflorescence. This matches the tassels of a Zea sp., and the absence of
ears makes it likely to be Zea mays L. subsp. mexicana (Schrad.) H.H. Iltis, teosinte,
a progenitor of maize (Fig. 4.124b).
Distribution Native to Mexico.
Names Maiz (Spanish), maize (English), cintli (Nahuatl); Mexican teosinte
(English), teocintli (Nahuatl). The name accompanying this phytomorph, otoly, is
transliterated as ātlācai and may be derived from ātlacui, Nahuatl, to draw or carry
water (Herrera 2004; Karttunen 1983; Siméon 2010).
Uses Maize is widely cultivated as a grain and is a medicinal herb among the
Huastecs (Alcorn 1984).
Fig. 4.123 Penthorum sedoides: (a) fol. 30v; (b) inflorescence and leaves of P. sedoides. (Source:
Fritz Flohr Reynolds, CC BY-SA 3.0); (c) botanical painting of P. sedoides from Millspaugh (1892
1:t. 57)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
165
Polemoniaceae
Fol. 4v. Cobaea sp., cf. C. biaurita (Fig. 4.125)
Description With a basally woody stem, pinnately compound elliptic leaves, campanulate corolla, segmented calyx, and exserted style (Fig. 4.125a), the best match
would be a Cobaea sp., most probably C. biaurita Standl. (Fig. 4.125b, c), which is
closely related to the cultivated C. scandens Cav. and has elliptic leaflets with acute
to acuminate apices and flowers that emerge cream-colored but later mature to
purple (Standley 1914; Prather 1999).
Distribution Native to Chiapas and Oaxaca, Mexico.
Names Unknown.
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.124 Zea sp.?: (a) fol. 101v(1)#4; (b) teosinte tassel. (Source: Jan Thomas Johansson)
Angiosperms
166
Polygonaceae
Fol. 43v (Right Side). Neomillspaughia emarginata? (Fig. 4.126)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.126a) has a tripartite inflorescence of the
family Polygonaceae, mostly white. The leaves curl around the stems. This was
probably assembled from fragmented dried specimens in which the leaves had
curled, but it might be Neomillspaughia emarginata (H.  Gross) S.F.  Blake
(Fig. 4.126b).
Distribution Native to Mexico.
Names Unknown.
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.125 Cobaea sp.: (a) fol 4v; (b) flower of C. scandens. (Source: Michael Wolf, CC BY-SA
3.0); (c) herbarium sheet of C. biaurita (F1662840). (Source: The Field Museum)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
167
Ranunculaceae
Fol. 95r. Actaea rubra f. neglecta (Fig. 4.127)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.127a) has crenate, pinnately compound
leaves and noticeably white, globose fruits in a raceme, fitting quite definitely an
Actaea sp., probably the white-fruited Actaea rubra (Aiton) Willd. f. neglecta
(Gillman) B.L. Rob (Fig. 4.127b).
Distribution Actaea rubra is native to Eurasia and to North America from
Canada to New Mexico, but f. neglecta is more common in North America
(Compton et al. 1998).
Names Baneberry (English).
Uses The common name baneberry suggests that it is poisonous.
Fig. 4.126 Neomillspaughia emarginata?: (a) fol. 43v, right side; (b) N. emarginata. (Source:
http://www.cicy.mx/sitios/flora%20digital/ficha_virtual.php?especie=1987)
Angiosperms
168
Fol. 44r. Anemone narcissiflora (Fig. 4.128)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.128a) bears six white petals subtended by
green bracts and a ring of linear leaves. The roots are ample but not tuberous. It
bears an uncanny resemblance to Anemone narcissiflora L. (Fig. 4.128b).
Distribution Ranges from Eurasia and northwest North America to Colorado, with
at least 12 varieties.
Names Narcissus anemone (English).
Uses Moerman (1998) records culinary and medicinal value by the Alaska natives
and Aleut, especially for hemorrhage.
Fig. 4.127 Actaea rubra f. neglecta: (a) fol. 95r; (b) fruits and leaves of Actaea rubra f. neglecta.
(Courtesy of Donald Cameron)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
169
Fol. 52r. Anemone patens (Fig. 4.129)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.129a) has a terminal, pubescent blue flower
with many linear bracts; leaves are deeply laciniate; roots are brown, long, and tuberous. This matches very nicely the variability of Anemone patens L., (Fig. 4.129b, c).
Distribution Circumboreal, south to Texas and New Mexico.
Names Cutleaf anemone, pasqueflower, prairie crocus (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.128 Anemone narcissiflora: (a) fol. 44r; (b) A. narcissiflora. (Source: Σ64, CC BY-SA 3.0)
Angiosperms
170
Fol. 29v. Anemone tuberosa (Fig. 4.130)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.130a) has blue-green, hairy flower buds with
a multi-petaled, bluish corolla; basal leaves are deeply divided; roots are tuberous.
This matches Anemone tuberosa Rydb. (Fig. 4.130b).
Distribution Native from Utah to Mexico.
Names Desert anemone (English)
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.129 Anemone patens: (a) fol. 52r; (b, c) flowers and leaves of Anemone patens. (Source:
Tom Koerner, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and John Richards, respectively)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
171
Rosaceae
Fol. 42r (Right Side). Rubus trivialis? (Fig. 4.131)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.131a) is entirely vegetative, but the trifoliate
leaves with crenate margin in orange with spatulate leaflets matches a senescent
leaf of a Rubus sp., possibly one of dewberries, such as R. trivialis Michx.
(Fig. 4.131b).
Distribution Native from Virginia to Texas.
Names Dewberry (English).
Uses This was a food plant of the Indians in the Florida Panhandle (Stockdale and
Bryenton 1978).
Fig. 4.130 Anemone tuberosa: (a) fol. 29v; (b) A. tuberosa. (Source: 7Song)
Angiosperms
172
Rubiaceae
Fol. 13v. Randia aculeata (Fig. 4.132)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.132a) has an unusual corolla with only
three white lobes (one seems to be hidden to the rear), with a slightly exserted
stigma on an inferior bluish ovary. Leaves are entire, dense, and green to coppery.
Except for the corolla lobes, this fits rather well the Rubiaceae, most probably a
Randia sp., R. aculeata L. (Fig. 4.132b, c). This species usually has five corolla
lobes but can have fewer.
Distribution Native from the Caribbean to Mexico and Colombia.
Names White indigoberry (English); Spanish names include escontria, maíz
tostado (Colombia), agalla de costa, espinoso, pitajoni bravo, pitajoni espinoso,
yamaguey, yamaguey de costa (Cuba); crucilla, crucilla de la costa, papachilla
(Sinaloa, Mexico); cruceto, crucilla (Tamaulipas, Mexico); crucete, espino cruz
(Veracruz, Mexico); cambrón, escambrón, palo de cotorra, tintillo (Puerto Rico)
(Standley 1920–1926). A Nahuatl name is tempixquiztli (Díaz 1976).
Fig. 4.131 Rubus trivialis?: (a) fol. 42r (right side); (b) R. trivialis. (Source: Melody Lytle, Lady
Bird Johnson Wildflower Center)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
173
Uses Ayensu (1981) records for this species: “Boil leaves for tea for fever in bones;
bathe with cooled decoction for sores and infections. With Cassia bahamensis use
roots of leaves for tea to help expel childbirth. Boil with Tamarindus indica as tea
for fever and chills.”
Fig. 4.132 Randia aculeata: (a) fol. 13v; (b) R. aculeata flowers with four corolla lobes. (Source: Sam
Fraser-Smith, CC BY 2.0); (c) flowers with five corolla lobes. (Source: Scott Zona, CC BY 2.0)
Salicaceae
Fol. 100r#11. Salix sp.? (Fig. 4.133)
Description The phytomorph (Fig. 4.133a) has the appearance of a Salix sp.
Distribution Salix humboldtiana Willd. is a species widespread in Mexico
(Fig. 4.133b).
Names The word accompanying this, sopam, transliterates as nāhuoha, which
may be a phonetic version of the Nahuatl nahua, to dance (Herrera 2004; Karttunen
1983; Siméon 2010), perhaps referring to the dance of the leaves in wind.
Salix lasiolepis Benth. or S. prardoxa Kunth is known as quetzala[h]uexotl,
quetzalhuexotl, quetzalauexotl, or quetzalāhuexōtl after fol. 57v of the
Angiosperms
174
Codex Cruz-Badianus (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Linares and Bye 2013;
Ortiz de Montellano 1990; Reko 1947).
Uses Willowleaf tea, prepared with S. taxifolia Kunth, is still medicinal in Mexico
today (Martinez 1969).
Saxifragaceae
Fol. 49r. Lithophragma affine (Fig. 4.134)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.134a) has blue flowers with fringed petals
and red calyces; leaves are numerous and borne tightly together on long petioles;
roots are tuberous. This matches the variability of Lithophragma affine A.  Gray
(Fig. 4.134b, c), which intergrades with L. parviflorum (Hook.) Torr. & A. Gray
(Park and Elvander 2012).
Distribution Native from Oregon to Baja California.
Names San Francisco woodland star (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.133 Salix sp.?: (a) fol. 100r#11; (b) S. humboldtiana. (Source: http://www.conservamosica.
org/conica/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/Salix_humboldtiana-Diapo2.jpg)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
175
Solanaceae
Fol. 101r#3 and Fol. 101v(1)#2. Capsicum annuum (Fig. 4.135)
Description O’Neill (1944) identified a Capsicum sp. in the Voynich Codex.
However, in the text he said fol. 101v, but the illustration provided was from fol. 101r.
We agree that the shape and color of the fruits of both phytomorphs (Fig. 4.135a, b)
agree with the genus Capsicum. Phytomorph #3 on fol. 101r has erect green fruits
with depressed stem attachments and a forked primary root. Phytomorph #2 on fol.
101v has pendant red fruits and a forked primary root. Both fall within the wide
variation of C. annuum L. (Fig. 4.135b, c).
Distribution The common red capsicum pepper originated in Mesoamerica and
was introduced to Eurasia and Africa by the early sixteenth century.
Names Capsicum pepper, chili pepper, hot and sweet pepper (English); chili
(Nahuatl). The name accompanying the phytomorph in fol. 101r#3, otal, atloca,
might be derived from the Nahuatl, atococ, drowned, perhaps alluding to its use to
induce thirst. The name accompanying fol. 101v(1)#2, otal, atloca, has not been
translated. Nahuatl names, including those in Sahagún’s Florentine Codex, are ahuiFig. 4.134 Lithophragma affine: (a) fol. 49r; (b, c) inflorescence and leaves of L. affine, respectively. (Source: Paul Slichter and ©Rebecca Snyder www.fallbrooksource.com, respectively)
Angiosperms
176
yac tlatancuaye, aji, chictecitl, and chile (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989). In
Hernández et al. (1651:135–137) and Hernández (1942:430,431,433,434), it is chilli
(Farfán and Elferink 2010; Ocaranza 2011).
Uses Widely used as food, and the hot (piquant) types, as a spice.
Fig. 4.135 Capsicum annuum: (a) fol. 101#3; (b) fol. 101v(1)#2; (c, d) green and red fruit of
C. annuum. (Source: Consell Comarca Baix Empordà, CC BY 2.0 and H. Zell, CC BY-SA 3.0,
respectively)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
177
Fol. 21v. Lycianthes moziniana? (Fig. 4.136)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.136a) displays a foliar organ unknown in
nature. The logical solution is that the artist created artificial foliage to accommodate fragmented dried leaves, alternating adaxial and abaxial surfaces into a
telescoping foliar organ; this idea indicates that we also cannot trust the opposite
leaf arrangement. The flower, actinomorphic with five petals, darker bluish on the
ribs, with an inferior ovary and reddish stamens, fits a Lycianthes sp. well, e.g.,
L. moziniana (Dun.) Bitter. (Fig. 4.136b).
Distribution Native to Mexico, endemic to the highland plateau and Oaxana.
Names Tlanochtle (Nahuatl).
Uses Edible fruit used for ceremonial purposes (Lindsay 1994; Williams 1993).
Fig. 4.136 Fol. 21v. Lycianthes moziniana?: (a) fol. 21v; (b) L. moziniana flower. (Source:
Courtesy of plantae mexicanae tenorianae, Pedro Tenorio-Lezama)
Angiosperms
178
Urticaceae
Fol. 25r. Urtica sp., cf. U. chamaedryoides (Fig. 4.137)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.137a) was first postulated by the Rev. Hugh
O’Neill (1944) to be a member of the Urticaceae, or nettle family. The best match,
because of the dentate, lanceolate leaves and reddish inflorescences, seems to be
Urtica chamaedryoides Pursh, heart-leaf nettle (Fig. 4.137b).
Distribution Native from Canada to northern Mexico.
Names Urtica and the closely related genus Urera also occur in the Codex CruzBadianus and Hernández. Urtica chamaedryoides may be atzitzicaztli/atzizicaztli/
ā-tzītzicāztli (water nettle) of fol. 16 of the Cruz-Badianus, also discussed in
Hernández et al. (1651:356) and Hernández (1942:384) (Bye and Linares 2013; de
Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952; Miranda
and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992). Additional Nahuatl
names are chichicastli/chichicastle/tsitsikaxtli (Díaz 1976).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.137 Urtica sp.: (a) fol. 25v; (b) U. chamaedryoides. (Source: Steve Baskauf, CC
BY-NC-SA 3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
179
Valerianaceae/Caprifoliaceae
Fol. 65r. Valeriana albonervata (Fig. 4.138)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.138a) bears palmate or cleft-lobed leaves;
inflorescence; and taproots that are napiform to fusiform, often forked. It is a good
match for Valeriana albonervata B.L. Rob. (Fig. 4.138b), recently placed in the
Caprifoliaceae.
Distribution Native to the Sierra Madre of Mexico, abundant in the Sierras of
Tamaulipas and Nuevo Leon (Meyer 1951).
Names Unknown.
Uses Medicinal uses of the genus in Mexico are recorded by Martinez (1969).
Fig. 4.138 Valeriana albonervata: (a) fol. 65r; (b) botanical drawing of V. albonervata from
Meyer (1951)
Angiosperms
180
Verbenaceae
Fol. 11r. Citharexylum flabellifolium (Fig. 4.139)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.139a) has rotund to orbicular, crenate, gray
to green leaves on a dense shrub and lobed, actinomorphic, bluish corollas. This
matches Citharexylum flabellifolium S. Watson (Fig. 4.139b).
Distribution Native to Mexico, from Baja California Sur to Sonora.
Names Citharexylum spinosum L. (C. fruticosum L.) is called penda in Taino
(García Bidó 2014). Florida fiddlewood (English). Spanish names in Mexico for
this genus include comida de cuervo (Durango); chachalaca (Michoacán); naranjilo, tepesi, roble, roble amarillo (Veracruz) (Standley 1920–1926).
Uses Landscape plants.
Fig. 4.139 Citharexylum flabellifolium: (a) fol. 11r; (b) flower. (Source: Sue Carnahan, SEINet
Arizona-New Mexico Chapter, CC BY-SA); (c) shoot. (Source: Sue Carnahan, SEINet ArizonaNew Mexico Chapter, CC BY-SA)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
181
Fol. 94r. Duranta erecta (D. repens) (Fig. 4.140)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.140a) has terminal black fruits with a white
terminal knob, arranged in a corymb or umbel. Leaves are obcordate and crenate.
The roots are brown, thick and branched. Except for the shape of the inflorescence
(Fig. 4.140b), this matches perfectly a dried specimen of the repent form of Duranta
erecta L. (D. repens L.) (Fig. 4.140c). The fruits are golden yellow when fresh and
are borne on a panicle, but when dried, they often quickly fall apart and turn black.
Because the color of the fruits matches the color of a dried specimen, the sample
presumably would have been fragmented when the artist prepared this illustration,
and the artist was likely unaware of the color of the mature fruit on a living branch.
Distribution The shrub is native from Florida and Texas south to Argentina, but it
is widely cultivated around the world in semitropical and tropical areas.
Names Golden dewdrops (English).
Uses Landscape plant, popular in the subtropics around the world.
Fig. 4.140 Duranta erecta: (D. repens) (a) fol. 94r; (b) fruit cluster of D. erecta. (Source: Hari
Krishnan, CC BY-SA 3.0); (c) herbarium sheet of D. erecta (F1721033). (Source: The Field
Museum, CC-BY-NC)
Angiosperms
182
Fol. 10v. Petrea volubilis (Fig. 4.141)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.141a) has both bluish calyces and corollas
subtended by entire, petiolated leaves, the inflorescence weeping or vining. The
inferior ovary is prominent below. This matches the variability of Petrea volubilis
L. (Fig. 4.141b).
Distribution Vine is native to Mexico and South America.
Names Queen’s wreath (English). Spanish and Mayan names include jazmín azul,
chaparrito (Colombia); choreque (Costa Rica); adelfa, flor de Jesús, lengua de
vaca, adolfina (El Salvador); opp tzimin (Yucatán, Mexico); flor de Santa Mariá
(Tabasco, Mexico); totopostillo, soltero (Oaxaca, Mexico); bejuco de caballo
(Yucatán, Veracruz, Mexico); raspa-sombrero, jazmín, coamecate azul (Veracruz,
Mexico); hoja chigüe (Nicaragua); buirá (Panama); (Standley 1920–1926).
Uses Widely planted as a horticultural subject around the tropics, and a renowned
medicinal herb. The Huastecs use this as a medicinal herb (Alcorn 1984); at
Huasteca Potosina, Mexico, infusions of the leaves are used for kidney stones, rheumatism, diarrhea, and urinary infections under the name raspasombrero (Josabad
Alonso-Castro et al. 2012). It has also been shown to be antidiabetic, anticancer, and
antioxidant (Abdel-Hady et al. 2011; Sharma and Vijayvergia 2013).
Fig. 4.141 Petrea volubilis: (a) fol. 10v (b) inflorescence. (Source: J.M. Garg, CC-BY-SA-3.0,2.5,
2.0,1.0 GFDL); (c) dried shoot. (Source: Forest & Kim Starr, CC-BY-3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
183
Violaceae
Fol. 9v. Viola bicolor (V. rafinesquei) (Fig. 4.142)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.142a) clearly shows linear, terminal stipular
lobes, as in the North American native V. bicolor Pursh (V. rafinesquei Greene)
(Fig. 4.142b)—not spatulate, as in the Eurasian V. tricolor L. Also, this phytomorph
matches the blue flowers of V. bicolor, not the tricolored ones of V. tricolor;
V. bicolor flowers are uniformly cream to blue, whereas those of V. tricolor usually
have two purple upper petals and three cream to yellow lower petals. Viola bicolor
is native from New Jersey to Texas and west to Arizona, with a center of diversity in
eastern Texas (Shinners 1961; Russell 1965).
Distribution North America. The delineation of V. bicolor as native to North
America and not introduced from elsewhere was only first fully elucidated by
Shinners in 1961. Prior to 1961, V. bicolor was considered doubtfully native and
was classified as a variety of the Eurasian V. kitaibeliana Schult. [var. rafinesquii
(Greene) Fernald] and was often confused with V. tricolor and V. arvensis Murray
(Fernald 1938). The North American V. bicolor, besides being seasonally dimorphic, with fertile and cleistogamous flowers, differs from the three other related
species of Eurasia by “roundish, almost entire basal leaves, and by pectinate,
palmately divided stipules. The petals of its open flowers are twice as long as the
sepals, slightly shorter than the petals of V. tricolor but longer than those of
V. arvensis and V. kitaibeliana.” (Clausen et al. 1964). Thus, because V. bicolor was
only known as a North American endemic since 1961, any attempt to propose a
forgery prior to 1912 (Barlow 1986) will have to explain this anomaly.
Names American field pansy, wild pansy (English).
Uses Moerman (2009) records the uses of Viola bicolor among Native Americans
as an analgesic, antidiarrheal, blood medicine, cold medicine, dermatological aid,
respiratory aid, and tonic.
Angiosperms
184
Zingiberaceae
Fol. 101v(1)#13. Renealmia alpinia (Fig. 4.143)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.143a) is apparently a member of the
Zingiberaceae, and Renealmia alpinia (Rottb.) Maas (Fig. 4.143b) fits rather well.
Distribution This species is native from Mexico to South America and the
Caribbean.
Names In Oaxaca, the ripe fruits of different species of Renealmia are used in
cooking as cherimole and huilimole (Kennedy 2010).
Fig. 4.142 Viola bicolor: (a) fol. 9v; (b) flowers and leaves of V. bicolor. (Source: Daniel Reed)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
185
Uses Culinary herb. Therapeutic against snakebite. It has also been used to treat
wounds, malignant tumors, epilepsy, and fungal infections (Gómez-Betancur and
Benjumea 2014).
Fig. 4.143 Renealmia alpinia: (a) fol. 101v(1)#13; (b) R. alpine. (Source: https://i.ebayimg.com/
images/g/XR4AAMXQWzNSm3UD/s-l500.jpg)
Hybrid Phytomorphs
Anemiaceae + Convolvulaceae
Fol. 19r. Anemiaceae: Anemia mexicana? + Convolvulaceae: Ipomoea
pubescens (Fig. 4.144)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.144a) combines fern fronds with an angiosperm flower. The morning glory blossom bears similarities to fol. 32v, Ipomoea
pubescens Lam., silky morning-glory (Fig. 4.144b, see also Fig. 4.82). The foliage is
that of a pinnate-pinnatifid, dimorphic fern frond with a terminal four-lobed morning-glory blossom. The roots are obvious but minimal. The fern frond with a branched
fertile frond arising from the sterile frond simply does not match any fern on earth,
but a guess might be an Anemia sp., probably A. mexicana Klotzsch (Fig. 4.144c).
Hybrid Phytomorphs
186
Distribution I. pubescens: native from Texas to Mexico, also in Bolivia, Peru, and
Argentina. A. mexicana: native from Texas to Mexico (Mickel and Smith 2004).
Names I. pubescens: silky morning glory (English). A. mexicana: Mexican flowering fern (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.144 Anemiaceae: Anemia mexicana? + Convolvulaceae: Ipomoea pubescens: (a) fol. 19r;
(b) Ipomoea pubescens flower. (Source: Apostolou Starvos); (c) Anemia mexicana foliage.
(Source: Casa Flora, Inc.)
Araceae + Caryophyllaceae
Fol. 44v. Araceae: Monstera deliciosa? + Caryophyllaceae: Silene sp.?
(Fig. 4.145)
Description The phytomorph (Fig. 4.145a), unlike any plant found in nature, bears
a consistently oval pinnatifid leaf that is also crenate, on a woody shrub or vine. The
closest match is Monstera deliciosa Liebm., Mexican breadfruit (Fig. 4.145b). This
phytomorph is also combined with a denticidal capsule of the Caryophyllaceae,
probably Silene antirrhina L. (Fig. 4.145c).
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
187
Distribution M. deliciosa: Native to tropical forest of southern Mexico, south to
Panama.
Silene antirrhina: Widespread throughout North America and parts of South America.
Names M. deliciosa: American breadfruit (English). S. antirrhina: sleepy silene,
sleepy catchfly (English).
Uses M. deliciosa: Ayensu (1981) records: “Root as internal alexiteric. Used
against snake bite.” Breedlove and Laughlin (1993) also discuss the medicinal value
of M. deliciosa. All parts of the plant are poisonous except ripe fruit, which can be
consumed. S. antirrhina: unknown.
Fig. 4.145 Araceae: Monstera deliciosa? + Caryophyllaceae: Silene sp.?: (a) Fol. 44v; (b) M. deliciosa fronds. (Source: http://wildlifeofhawaii.com/flowers/1438/monstera-deliciosa-monstera/); (c)
Silene antirrhina flowers. (Source: Stan Shebs, CC BY-SA 3.0)
Hybrid Phytomorphs
188
Arecaceae +?
Fol. 38r. + fol. 101v(1)#1 + fol 100r#6. Arecaceae: Chamaedorea
tuerckheimii + ? (Fig. 4.146)
Description The phytomorph shown in Fig. 4.146a is a single palm frond (Johnson
1998). The five “apostrophes” are probably mottling due to mites. The five inflorescences close to the roots may actually be pedicels, re-assembled from dried, fragmented
specimens, but the family is unknown. The roots are ample but not enlarged. This
might match the variability of leaf of Chamaedorea tuerckheimii (Dammer) Burret,
(Fig. 4.146b, c). Though not hybrid phytomorphs, the putative C. tuerckheimii from
fol. 101v(1)#1 and fol. 100r#6 are also included here for comparison.
Distribution Native from Mexico (states of Chiapas, Tabasco, and Veracruz) to
Guatemala in montane rainforests and cloud forests; very susceptible to mites
(Hodel 1992).
Names Potato-chip palm. The name accompanying fol. 101v(1)#1, which is likely
to be a Chamaedorea sp. (Fig. 4.146d), dokor, chātlāe, might be an orthographic
variation of the Nahuatl chāntli, vagina (Herrera 2004; Karttunen 1983; Siméon
2010. The phytomorph on fol. 100r#6 (Fig. 4.146e) is not cleft but is probably a
species of Chamaedora; the name, osaro, (ānoeā, Spanish), is a medical term
meaning without intelligence, from the French anoie (de Echegaray 1889).
Uses In Oaxaca and El Salvador, the buds of tepejilote (C. tepejilote Liebm.) are
used in cooking (Chizmar Fernández 2009; Kennedy 2010).
Fig. 4.146 Arecaceae +? Chamaedorea tuerckheimii: (a) fol. 38r; (b) C. tuerckheimii leaves.
(Source; http://www.htbg.com/Arecaceae/PAL-010-11-4-134/); (c) C. tuerckheimii cleft leaf.
(Source: https://www.rarepalmseeds.com/pix/ChaVer.shtml); (d) fol. 101v(1)#1; (e) fol. 100r#6
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
189
Asteraceae + Apiaceae
Fol. 31v. Asteraceae: Elephantopus mollis + Apiaceae: Lomatium
dissectum? (Fig. 4.147)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.147a) was obviously agglomerated from
dried, fragmented plant parts. The bluish Asteraceae of subfamily Vernonieae has
two green bracts and associated pinnately lobed foliage (Fig.  4.147b, c), a dead
giveaway of the genus Elephantopus. This falls within the variability of E. mollis
Kunth. The inflorescence from the Apiaceae is unknown buts bears resemblance to
Fol. 41v, (see Fig. 4.15), Lomatium dissectum (Fig. 4.147d).
Distribution E. mollis: native from Mexico to South America but now naturalized
worldwide. L. dissectium: native British Columbia to Mexico.
Names E. mollis: elephantsfoot (English). L. dissectum: biscuit root (English).
Uses E. mollis: Ayensu (1981) records: “Tea for colds and back pains with rum or
Desmodium sp. and Commelina sp., vulnerary; tonic, diaphoretic.” Kabiru and Por
(2013) discuss the traditional uses of E. mollis in the tropics. Recently, E. mollis has
been shown to be useful in treating cancer (Kuete et al. 2017; Lee et al. 1980; Ooi
et al. 2014) and as an antimicrobial (Ragasa et al. 2009). L. dissectum: Moerman
(1998) discusses the medicinal value among American Indians for a multitude of
symptoms.
Fig. 4.147 Asteraceae: Elephantopus mollis + Apiaceae: Lomatium dissectum?: (a) fol. 31v; (b)
E. mollis inflorescence. (Source: Ong Kwan Han @ natureloveyou.sg); (c) E. mollis leaves. (Source:
Ong Kwan Han @ natureloveyou.sg); (d) L. dissectum inflorescence. (Source: iDigBio, CC BY)
Hybrid Phytomorphs
190
Asteraceae + Asteraceae
Fol. 94v(1). Asteraceae: Acourtia sp.? + Dahlia sp.? (Fig. 4.148)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.148a) combines an Asteraceae inflorescence,
possibly subfamily Mutisioideae, possibly an Acourtia sp. for inflorescence and
leaves (Fig. 4.148b, see Fig. 4.25) with the tuberous roots of a Dahlia sp. (Fig. 4.148c,
see Fig. 4.36). Because the elliptic leaves are arranged unnaturally, this was probably re-created from dried, fragmented specimens.
Distribution Native to Mexico.
Names Acourtia sp.: desert peonies (English). Dahlia sp.: dahlia (English), dalia
(Spanish), acocotli (Nahuatl).
Uses Acourtia sp.: Decoction of A. thurberi is antidiabetic and antihyperalgesic
(Martínez et  al. 2017). Dahlia sp.: Still used in gastrointestinal diseases by the
Highland Maya of Chiapas, Mexico (Berlin and Berlin 1996) and was also used for
many medicinal and nutritive properties by the Aztecs (Whitley 1985).
Fig. 4.148 Asteraceae: Acourtia sp.? + Dahlia sp.?: (a) fol. 94v(1); (b) leaves of Acourtia sp.
(Source: Nickrent, D.L., Costea, M., Barcelona, J.F., Pelser, P.B. & Nixon, K. (2006 onwards)
PhytoImages. Available from: http://www.phytoimages.siu.edu); (c) roots of Dahlia sp. (Source:
F.D. Richards, CC BY-SA 2.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
191
Fol. 54r. Asteraceae: Calea zacatechichi? + Dahlia sp.? (Fig. 4.149)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.149a) is a conundrum. No member of the
Asteraceae except Eupatorium and Silphium has perfoliate leaves, but the inflorescence is obviously neither of these genera. This was most likely assembled from
dried, fragmented specimens, possibly of Calea zacatechichi Schltdl. (C. terniflora
Kunth pro parte) (Fig. 4.149b, c), combined with what looks like the tuberous roots
of a Dahlia sp. (Fig. 4.144d; see Fig. 4.36).
Fig. 4.149 Asteraceae: Calea zacatechichi? + Dahlia sp.: (a) fol. 54r; (b) Calea sp. dried specimen. (Source: http://dreamstudies.org/2011/09/27/getting-to-know-calea-zacatechichi-aka-thedream-herb/); (c) C. zacatechichi inflorescence. (Source: Pineali, GNU Free Documentation
License 2.1); (d) Dahlia sp. roots. (Source: F.D. Richards, CC BY-SA 2.0)
Hybrid Phytomorphs
192
Distribution C. ternifolia: native to Mexico and Central America. Dahlia sp.:
native to Mexico.
Names C. zacatechichi: Mexican dream herb, bittergrass, Mexican calea (English);
Dahlia sp.: dahlia (English), dalia (Spanish), acocotli (Nahuatl). Calea zacatechichi may be the same as ahuapatli/ahuapahtli/ahoapatli of Hernández et  al.
(1651:133) and Hernández (1942:49) (Díaz 1976) or chichicxihuitl of fol. 32r of the
Codex Cruz-Badianus (Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964). Additional Nahuatl
names might be xaxachichitl, xikin, zacachichi/zacachichic, and zacatechichi (Díaz
1976).
Uses Calea sp.: Martinez (1969) records extensive medicinal information for C.
ternifolia. The medicinal value of C. ternifolia is also discussed by Aguilar (2010)
and Breedlove and Laughlin (1993). Ayensu (1981) records for C. jamaicensis (L.)
L.: “Cold remedy; fever and colds: head in steam of boiling plant.” Asprey and
Thornton (1953, 1954) record for this species:” cold remedy.” González Stuart
(2004) records: “Tea from the leaves promotes appetite and is also used to treat
fever and stomach ailments, such as colic, and diarrhea.”
Dahlia sp.: Still used in gastrointestinal diseases by the Highland Maya of Chiapas,
Mexico (Berlin and Berlin 1996) and was also used for many medicinal and nutritive properties by the Aztecs (Whitley 1985).
Fol. 33v. Asteraceae: Psacalium sp. cf. P. peltigerum? + cf. Pippenalia sp.?
cf. P. delphinifolia (Fig. 4.150)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.150a) has lobed, peltate leaves and fleshy,
round subterranean tubers. The inflorescence is characteristic of the tribe Heliantheae,
and the “achenes” or cypselae are round and naked, a rare feature in the Asteraceae
family. This illustration is a conundrum. The leaves and tubers suggest Psacalium sp.,
possibly P. peltigerum (B.L. Rob. & Seaton) Rydb. (Fig. 4.150b), but the large flower
suggests a Pippenalia sp., possibly P. delphinifolia (Rydb.) McVaugh (Fig. 4.150c).
Distribution Both Psacalium and Pippenalia are Mexican genera.
Names Indianbush (English) for Psacallium sp.
Uses Unknown.
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
193
Fig. 4.150 Asteraceae: Psacalium sp.? + Pippenalia sp.?: (a) fol. 33v; (b) herbarium sheet of
Pippenalia delphinifolia (ASU0029020). (Source: Arizona State University Herbarium); (c) herbarium sheet of Psacalium peltigerum var. hintonii R.  W. Pippen (MICH1107637). (Source:
University of Michigan Library Digital Collections. University of Michigan Herbarium Vascular
Plant Type Collection with Specimen Images)
Fol. 65v. Asteraceae: Chloracantha spinosa? + Stebbinsoseris heterocarpa?
(Fig. 4.151)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.151a) consists of two Asteraceae. The primary one
seems to be Chloracantha spinosa (Benth.) G. L. Nesom, subfamily Asterideae, tribe
Astereae, in which the disk florets are rendered green instead of yellow (Fig. 4.151b).
Grafted upon this is one bluish inflorescence of what seems to be Stebbinsoseris heterocarpa (Nutt.) K.L. Chambers, subfamily Cichorioideae (Fig. 4.151c).
Distribution Both native from California to Mexico.
Names C. spinosa: spiny chroracanta (English). S. heterocarpa: grassland silverpuffs (English).
Uses Unknown
Hybrid Phytomorphs
194
Asteraceae + Convolvulaceae
Fol. 40r. Asteraceae: Lygodesmia sp.? + Convolvulaceae: Ipomoea
plummerae var. cuneifolia? (Fig. 4.152)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.152a) was probably re-assembled from
dried, fragmented specimens, probably more than one species. The twelve florets of
this Asteraceae subfamily Cichorioideae, painted bluish, notably have crenate tips.
The bifurcated stem, which has no natural counterpoint, bears palmate, deeply
lobed leaves. Roots are ample but not tuberous. The closest match for the flowers is
a Lygodesmia sp., L. texana (Torr. & A. Gray) Greene ex Small (Fig. 4.152b). The
foliage seems to be a desert Convolvulaceae, Ipomoea plummerae A.  Gray var.
cuneifolia (A. Gray) J. F. Macbr. (Fig. 4.152c).
Distribution Lygodesmia sp.: native from Oklahoma, Texas, and New Mexico to
Mexico. I. plummeria: Native to Nevada, New Mexico, Texas, and Mexico.
Names Lycodesmia sp.: Texas skeletonweed (English). I. plummerae: Huachuca
Mountain morning glory (English).
Uses Lycodesmia sp.: The medicinal value is discussed by Moerman (1998).
I. plummerae: Unknown.
Fig. 4.151 Asteraceae: Chloracantha spinosa? + Stebbinsoseris heterocarpa?: (a) fol. 65v; (b)
C. spinosa inflorescence. (Source: http://www.smmflowers.org/bloom/species/Stebbinsoseris_
heterocarpa.htm); (c) S. heterocarpa inflorescence. (Source: Peggy Romfh, Lady Bird Johnson
Wildflower Center)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
195
Asteraceae + Dioscoreaceae
Fol. 54v. Asteraceae: Cyrtocymura scorpioides? + Dioscoreaceae: Dioscorea
composita? (Fig. 4.153)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.153a) unites what may be a Cyrtocymura
sp., possibly C. scorpioides (Lam.) H. Rob., subfamily Asteriodeae, tribe Vernonieae
[Vernonia scorpioides (Lam.) Pers.] (Fig. 4.153b) with a Dioscorea sp., possibly
D. composita Hemsl., seen in fol. 17v and Fig. 4.85 (Fig. 4.153c).
Distribution C. scorpioides: South America, Central America, Mexico. D. composita: native from southern Mexico to Costa Rica.
Names C. scorpioides: erva-preá, assa peixe (Spanish). D. composita: barbasco
(Spanish).
Uses C. scorpioides: cytotoxic to tumor cells (Buskuhl et al. 2009; Pagno et al.
2006) as well as a treatment for skin inflammation (Pollo et al. 2013; Rauha et al.
2011). D. composita: used for both rheumatism and as a contraceptive in Mexico
(Argueta Villamar et al. 2009).
Fig. 4.152 Asteraceae: Lygodesmia sp.? cf. L. texana+ Convolvulaceae: Ipomoea plummerae var.
cuneifolia?: (a) fol. 40r; (b, c) L. texana. (Source: https://www.flickr.com/photos/20238838@
N07/7185662826 & Robert L. Stone, Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center); (d) I. plummerae
foliage. (Source: Western New Mexico University Department of Natural Sciences and the Dale
A. Zimmerman Herbarium)
Hybrid Phytomorphs
196
Asteraceae? + Euphorbiaceae?
Fol. 96r. Asteraceae: Emilia fosbergii? + Euphorbiaceae: Manihot
rubricaulis? (Fig. 4.154)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.154a) resembles the bird-pollinated flower
(ornithophily) of an Asteraceae species grafted onto a member of the Euphorbiaceae.
Unfortunately, the flower does not match any Asteraceae in Mesoamerica
(Vogel 2015). Perhaps this is Emilia fosbergii Nicolson (Fig. 4.154b), similar to
fol. 3v (see Fig. 4.37), grafted onto Manihot rubricaulis I. M. Johnst. of fol. 93v
(see Fig. 4.97) (Fig. 4.154b). The tubers appear to be those of Manihot esculenta
Crantz (Fig. 4.154d).
Fig. 4.153 Asteraceae: Cyrtocymura scorpioides? + Dioscoreaceae: Dioscorea composita?: (a)
fol. 54v; (b) C. scorpiodes flower. (Source: Michael Nee, C. V. Starr Virtual Herbarium, https://
www.nybg.org/botany/nee/ambo/Checklist/images-ast/Cyrtocymura_scorp.jpg); (c) D. composita
root. (Source: Syntex Pharmaceuticals Ltd., CC BY 4.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
197
Distribution E. fosbergii: Semitropics of the world, including South America.
M. rubricaulis: Mexico; native to South America, perhaps originating in Brazil.
Names E. fosbergii: Florida tasselflower, Cupid’s shaving brush (English). Manihot
esculenta: mandioca (Spanish), cassava (English).
Uses E. fosbergii: ornamental, treatment for high blood pressure. M. rubricaulis:
tuberous roots are edible after treatment.
Fig. 4.154 Asteraceae: Emilia fosbergii? + Euphorbiaceae: Manihot rubricaulis?: (a) fol. 96r; (b)
E. fosbergii flowers. (Source: Richard A.  Howard, USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service); (c) M. rubricaulis foliage. (Source: Sue Carnahan, SEINet Arizona-New Mexico Chapter,
CC BY-SA); (d) M. esculenta roots. (Source: David Monniaux, CC BY-SA)
Hybrid Phytomorphs
198
Asteraceae + Ranunculaceae
Fol. 26v. Asteraceae: Cyrtocymura scorpioides? + Ranunculaceae:
Thalictrum sp.? (Fig. 4.155)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.155a) unites what may be a Cyrtocymura
sp., possibly C. scorpioides (Lam.) H. Rob., subfamily Asteriodeae, tribe Vernonieae,
with foliage that is overwhelmingly similar to fol. 89v(3) (see Fig. 4.156b). However,
there is no extensive tuberous root, as in fol. 89v(3), so this might be another species
of Thalictrum, such as T. hernandezii Tausch (Fig. 4.155c).
Distribution C. scorpioides: South America, Central America, Mexico. T. hernandezii: Mexico.
Names C. scorpioides: erva-preá, assa peixe (Spanish); T. hernandezii: Hernández’s
meadow rue, (English), cocoztic, cozticpatli, coztic patli acatlanensi/cozticpatli
acatlanense (Nahuatl).
Uses C. scorpioides: toxic to tumor cells (Buskuhl et al. 2009; Pagno et al. 2006)
as well as a treatment for skin inflammation (Pollo et al. 2013; Rauha et al. 2011).
T. hernandezii: Antimalarial (Martinez 1969).
Fig. 4.155 Asteraceae: Cyrtocymura scorpioides?  +  Ranunculaceae: Thalictrum hernandezii?:
(a) fol. 26v; (b) C. scorpioides flower. (Source: https://www.nybg.org/botany/nee/ambo/Checklist/
images-ast/Cyrtocymura_scorp.jpg); (c) T. hernandezii. (Source: SEINet, Arizona-New Mexico
Chapter)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
199
Fol. 89v(3). Asteraceae: Cyrtocymura scorpioides? + Ranunculaceae:
Thalictrum fendleri? (Fig. 4.156)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.156a) unites what may be a Cyrtocymura
sp., possibly C. scorpioides (Lam.) H. Rob., subfamily Asteriodeae, tribe Vernonieae
(Fig.  4.156b), with a Thalictrum sp., possibly T. fendleri Engelm. ex A.  Gray
(Fig. 4.156c), which can have a tuberous roots, as in the phytomorph.
Distribution C. scorpioides: South America, Central America, Mexico. T. fendleri:
native to western United States and northern Mexico.
Names C. scorpioides: erva-preá, assa peixe (Spanish). T. fendleri: Fendler’s
meadowrue (English).
Uses C. scorpioides: toxic to tumor cells (Buskuhl et al. 2009; Pagno et al. 2006)
as well as a treatment for skin inflammation (Pollo et al. 2013; Rauha et al. 2011).
Moerman (1998) discusses the value of T. fendleri among Indian tribes as a drug,
dye, and other.
Fig. 4.156 Asteraceae: Cyrtocymura scorpioides? + Ranunculaceae: Thalictrum fendleri?: (a) fol.
89v(3); (b) C. scorpioides flower. (Source: https://www.nybg.org/botany/nee/ambo/Checklist/
images-ast/Cyrtocymura_scorp.jpg); (c) T. fendleri foliage. (Source: Photo ©Al Schneider, www.
swcoloradowildflowers.com); (d) T. fendleri. (Source: SEINet, Arizona-New Mexico Chapter)
Cactaceae + Grossulariaceae
Fol. 18v. Cactaceae: Carnegiea gigantea + Grossulariaceae: Ribes
malvaceum? (Fig. 4.157)
Description The terminal flower of this phytomorph (Fig. 4.157a) has a scaly tube
with many petals, along with many hairs that may be stamens. The green leaves are
palmately lobed and simple, on a stoloniferous shrub. The flower is overwhelmingly
Hybrid Phytomorphs
200
that of Carnegiea gigantea (Engelm.) Britton & Rose (Fig. 4.157b), saguaro, native
to the Sonoran desert; the foliage matches that of fol. 23r, Ribes malvaceum Sm.
(Fig. 4.157c).
Distribution C. gigantea: Native to the Sonoran desert in the southwestern United
States and Mexico. R. malvaceum: Native from California to Baja Norte, Mexico.
Names C. gigantea: saguaro (Spanish, English). Ribes malvaceum: chaparral currant (English).
Uses Moerman (1998) discusses the culinary and medicinal value of C. gigantea
among the Pima, Apache, Chiricahua, and Mescalero, and the medicinal value of
R. malvaceum among the Luiseño and Cahuilla. Standley (1920–1926) lists many
edible uses of the fruit and seeds of saguaro but is silent on the medicinal value of
the flowers.
Fig. 4.157 Cactaceae: Carnegiea gigantea + Grossulariaceae: Ribes malvaceum?: (a) fol. 18v.
(b) C. gigantea flowers. (Source: http://www.fireflyforest.com/flowers/339/carnegiea-giganteasaguaro/); (c) R. malvaceum foliage. (Source: Toedrifter, CC BY-SA 3.0).
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
201
Convolvulaceae + ?
Fol. 66v. Convolvulaceae: Ipomoea nil + ? (Fig. 4.158)
Description The two flowers of this phytomorph (Fig. 4.158a) resemble that of fol.
57r, i.e., Ipomoea nil (L.) Roth. The foliage might be a representation of abaxial and
adaxial surfaces of rotund leaves, but it is difficult to identify. An alternative interpretation is that this may be I. pes-caprae (L.) R.Br., but the flowers in I. pes-caprae
are larger and not picotee.
Distribution I. nil: Native to Mexico to Argentina; I. pes-caprae: pantropical.
Names I. nil: Picotee morning glory, ivy morning glory, Japanese morning glory
(English); I. pes-caprae: bay hops (English), bejuco de playa (Spanish).
Uses Ornamental.
Fig. 4.158 Convolvulaceae: Ipomoea nil? +?: (a) fol. 66v; (b) Ipomoea nil flowers and leaves.
(Source: Courtesy of Rare and Exotic Seeds); (c) I. pes-caprae. (Source: Primejyothi, CC BY-SA 3.0)
Cucurbitaceae + Dioscoreaceae?
Fol. 9r. Cucurbitaceae: Ibervillea sonorae + Dioscoreaceae: Dioscorea sp.?
(Fig. 4.159)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.159a) bears the resemblance of a “hybrid”
phytomorph from dried specimens, i.e., Ibervillea sonorae (S.  Watson) Greene
(Fig. 4.157b) “grafted” on a Dioscorea sp. such as D. mexicana Scheidw. (Fig. 4.159c).
Hybrid Phytomorphs
202
Distribution I. sonorae: Sonoran zone into Baja California, Mexico. Dioscorea
spp.: native and cultivated throughout Mexico.
Names I. sonorae: guarequi (Mexico), guareke, wereke, limoncillo, melon coyote
(Spanish); big root, coyote melon, cowpie plant (English). Dioscorea mexicana:
cabeza de negro (Spanish), Mexican yam (English).
Uses I. sonorae: used in Mexico for various ailments. “The dried root is used to
make a decoction to treat diabetes. Pulverized root is applied to skin as an antiseptic.
Avoid in pregnancy and lactation.” (González Stuart 2004). Dioscorea spp.: discussed by Moerman (1998).
Fig. 4.159 Cucurbitaceae: Ibervillea sonorae + Dioscoreaceae: Dioscorea sp.?: (a) fol. 9r; (b)
I. sonorae inflorescence. (Source: http://www.bihrmann.com/caudiciforms/subs/dio-mex-sub.asp);
(c) D. mexicana root. (Source: T.R. Van Devender)
Fabaceae + ?
Fol. 28r. Fabaceae: Styphnolobium burseroides? + ? (Fig. 4.160)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.160a) seemingly was created from fragmented, dried specimens. It represents a legume in the middle of leaves. The three
loments, ridged from drying, seem to be the fruit of a Parkinsonia, Sophora, or
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
203
Styphnolobium sp. It might fall within the variability of the shrub Styphnolobium
burseroides M. Sousa, Rudd & González Medrano, Francisco (Fig. 4.160b, c). The
foliage remains unknown.
Distribution Native to Mexico.
Names Necklace pod (English).
Uses Unknown.
Fig. 4.160 Fabaceae: Styphnolobium burseroides? +?: (a) fol. 28r; (b, c) S. burseroides fruits,
showing one, two, three, and four loments. (Source: Sousa and Rudd 1993)
Hybrid Phytomorphs
204
Osmundaceae + Asteraceae
Fol. 90r. Osmundaceae: Osmunda regalis var. spectabilis + Asteraceae:
Vernonia sp. (Fig. 4.161)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.161a) has an Asteraceae subfamily Asterideae, tribe Vernonieae, inflorescence, but no species in the Asteraceae has twice
pinnate foliage. This probably represents an inflorescence of a Vernonia sp. such as
Vernonia joyaliae B.  Turner grafted onto the frond of Osmunda regalis L. var.
spectabilis (Willd.) A. Gray (Fig. 4.161c; see Fig. 4.6).
Distribution O. regalis var. spectabilis: native North and South America;
V. joyaliae: native to Mexico.
Names O. regalis: royal fern (English). V. joyaliae: unknown.
Uses The medicinal value of O. regalis by the Iroquois is discussed by Moerman
(1998); he also discusses the culinary and medicinal value of Vernonia spp.
Fig. 4.161 Osmundaceae: Osmunda regalis var. spectabilis + Asteraceae: Vernonia sp.: (a) fol.
90r; (b) V. joyaliae. (Source: SEINet, Arizona-New Mexico Chapter); (c) O. regalis var. spectabilis
fronds. (Source: Online Virtual Flora of Wisconsin. 2018. http://wisflora.herbarium.wisc.edu.
Accessed on June 06)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
205
Papaveraceae + Moraceae
Fol. 89v(2). Papaveraceae: Bocconia frutescens + Moraceae: Ficus pertusa?
(Fig. 4.162)
Description The foliage of this phytomorph (Fig.  4.162a) resembles Bocconia
frutescens (Fig. 4.162b, see fol. 6r) except that it is paired with two Ficus fruits,
probably F. pertusa L.f. (Fig. 4.162c).
Distribution B. frutescens: Native from Mexico to South America. F. pertusa:
Native from Mexico to Brazil and Jamaica.
Names B. frutescens: gordolobo, llorasangre, tabaquillo palo amarillo, palo de toro,
pan cimarrόn (Spanish); plume poppy, tree poppy, tree celadine (English). F. pertusa:
bibosi palomo, mata-pau (Spanish). Bocconia frutescens also has Nahuatl names of
cococ patli/cococpatli, iztecauhticmixitl and uitzocuitlapilxiuitl (Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1989); it may be the same as cococ xihuitl (stinging herb) in fol. 30v in the
Codex Cruz-Badianus (Farfán & Elferink 2010; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Ortiz de
Montellano 1975, 1990; Reko 1947). Ficus pertusa also has Nahuatl names of amate
de madrono, amatillo, amazquitl/amezquite, coamichin, and nacapuli (Díaz 1976).
Fig. 4.162 Papaveraceae: Bocconia frutescens + Moraceae: Ficus pertusa?: (a) fol. 89v(2);
(b) B. frutescens foliage. (Source: JMK, CC BY-SA 3.0); (c) F. pertusa foliage and fruits
(Ibarra-Manríquez and Cornejo-Tenorio 2013)
Hybrid Phytomorphs
206
Uses B. frutescens: Ornamental; in Mexico used to treat skin conditions and respiratory tract infections; extracts have antimicrobial action against thuman pathogens,
Escherichia coli, Staphyloccus aureus, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa; dye plant.
F. perusa: In Mexico, used for toothache and inflammation of the breasts of women
who breastfeed (lactifuge) (Argueta Villamar et al. 2009).
Papaveraceae + Rubiaceae?
Fol. 6r. Papaveraceae: Bocconia frutescens + Rubiaceae: Ferdinandusa sp.?
(Fig. 4.163)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.163a) bears the appearance of a “hybrid”
phytomorph from dried specimens, i.e., pinnate leaves from a tree poppy, Bocconia
frutescens L. (Fig. 4.163b) and capsules of a Ferdinandusa sp. (Fig. 4.161c) with a
heavy mealybug infestation, grafted together on the same plant.
Fig. 4.163 Papaveraceae: Bocconia frutescens + Rubiaceae: Ferdinandusa sp.?: (a) Fol. 6r; (b) B.
frutescens foliage. (Source: JMK, CC BY-SA 3.0); (c) F. panamensis fruit. (Source: Dick Culbert,
CC BY 2.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
207
Distribution B. frutescens: Native from Mexico to South America. Ferdinandusa
spp. are native from Central America to South America; for example, F. panamensis
Standl. & L. O. Williams is native from Mexico to Colombia.
Names B. frutescens: gordolobo, llorasangre, tabaquillo palo amarillo, palo de
toro, pan cimarrόn (Spanish); plume poppy, tree poppy, tree celadine (English). B.
frutescens also has Nahuatl names of cococ patli/cococpatli, iztecauhticmixitl, and
uitzocuitlapilxiuitl (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989); it may be the same as cococ
xihuitl (stinging herb) in fol. 30v in the Codex Cruz-Badianus (Farfán and Elferink
2010; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Ortiz de Montellano 1975, 1990; Reko 1947).
F. panamensis: unknown.
Uses B. frutescens: Standley (1920–1926) states: “The plant contains an alkaloid,
protopine. The yellow or orange juice is very bitter and acrid and has a disagreeable
odor. It is used for treating ulcers, skin eruptions, chilblains, bronchitis, and chronic
ophthalmia, and to remove warts, and is said to have vermifuge and purgative properties. The leaves, too, are sometimes heated and applied as a poultice to wounds. In
Colombia an infusion of the roots is valued as a remedy for jaundice and dropsy. In
Jamaica, it is stated, the leaves are rubbed on house floors to keep away insects, and
in Colombia the oil extracted from the seeds is used to destroy vermin on the head
and skin.” The medicinal value of B. frutescens is discussed by Breedlove and
Laughlin (1993) and Chávez (2006). F. panamensis: unknown.
Polygonaceae + Asteraceae
Fol. 22r. Polygonaceae: Oxyria digyna? + Asteraceae: Bartlettina sp.?
(Fig. 4.164)
Description This phytomorph (Fig. 4.164a) shows leaves with extreme cupping,
which is usually a signal of infection, such as the infection of boxwood (Buxus spp.)
with boxwood psyllid [Cacopsylla (Psylla) buxi (Linnaeus)]. However, mountainsorrel, Oxyria digyna (L.) Hill (Fig. 4.164b), naturally exhibits degrees of cupping,
and most of the inflorescence agrees with the Polygonaceae. The bluish inflorescence
(Fig.  4.164c) cannot be identified beyond an Asteraceae, although it might be a
Bartlettina sp. such as Bartlettina sordida (Less.) R. M. King & H. Rob. (see fol.
46v, Fig. 4.29).
Distribution O. digyna: circumboreal, south to New Mexico and Arizona.
Names O. digyna: mountain sorrel. B. sordida: blue mist flower, blue torch (English).
Uses O. digyna: The culinary value by the Alaska Native and Eskimo is discussed
by Moerman (1998). B. sordida: ornamental.
Hybrid Phytomorphs
208
Rubiaceae + Boraginaceae?
Fol. 15v. Rubiaceae: Carapichea ipecacuanha + Boraginaceae: Tournefortia
volubilis? (Fig. 4.165)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.165a) has the appearance of a “hybrid”
phytomorph prepared from dried specimens, i.e., Carapichea ipecacuanha (Brot.)
L. Andersson [Cephaelis ipecacuanha (Brot.) Stokes] (Fig. 4.165b) and an inflorescence of Tournefortia volubilis L. (Fig. 4.165c), “grafted” together on the same
plant, united by a “cupule.” The inflorescence bears similarities to the Boraginaceae,
but the low foliage and tuberous roots bear more affinity to the Rubiaceae, and a
cupule is unknown in extant plants, having gone extinct with the pteridosperms.
Distribution C. ipacacuanha: Native from Brazil to Nicaragua but widely cultivated. T. volubilis: Native from Texas to Mexico.
Names C. ipecacuanha: twining soldierbush (English). T. volubilis: xulkin (Yucatán,
Maya); comida de culebra, Nicaragua; and pringamoza, Puerto Rico (Spanish)
(Standley 1920–1926). The latter species might be tlachichinoapatlahoac in
Hernández et al. (1651:292) and Hernández (1942:368) and (Díaz 1976).
Uses C. ipecacuanha: Used medically as a source of the emetic ipecac. T. volubilis:
Ayensu (1981) records “Decoction for sores on people and animals. Leaves parched,
ground up fine and dusted on sores. Boil for bathing aching or painful muscles.
Used for female troubles and to ‘restore man’s manhood.’”
Fig. 4.164 Polygonaceae: Oxyria digyna? + Asteraceae: Bartlettina sp.?: (a) fol. 22r; (b) Oxyria
digyna (Source: Paul Slichter); (c) Bartlettina sordida. (Source: Raulbot, CC BY-SA 3.0)
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
209
Smilacaceae +?
Fol. 22v. Smilacaceae: Smilax sp. + ? (Fig. 4.166)
Description This phytomorph (Fig.  4.166a) shows a rhizome with epidermal
prickles and jointed roots, very characteristic of briars, Smilax spp. (Fig. 4.166b),
which have leaves with entire margins, never crenate, with typically cordate bases.
The leaves have been apparently re-assembled from dried fragmented specimens,
and the terminal inflorescence is too foliar to even guess a family.
Distribution Smilax is found in tropics and subtropics worldwide, including species in North America and South America.
Fig. 4.165 Rubiaceae: Carapichea ipecacuanha + Boraginaceae: Tournefortia volubilis?: (a) fol.
15v; (b) C. ipecacuanha (Köhler et al. 1887); (c) Tournefortia volubilis. (Source: Sue Carnahan,
SEINet Arizona-New Mexico Chapter)
Hybrid Phytomorphs
210
Names Catbriars, greenbriers, smilaxes, sarsaparilla (English).
Uses Roots of numerous Smilax species are used for their medicinal value (Martinez
1969), and names and ethnobotanical uses are recorded by Standley (1920–1926)
and Moerman (1998).
Fig. 4.166 Smilacaceae: Smilax sp.?: (a) fol. 22v; (b) Smilax sp. roots. (Source: http://www.walterreeves.com/landscaping/smilax-id-and-control)
Conclusion
With one exception, all the images identified in the Voynich Codex have been shown
to be either plants indigenous to the New World or circumboreal (e.g., Actaea
rubra). One European introduction has been indicated (Tragopogon porrifolius),
likely a weedy contaminant in wheat introduced by the Spanish. This provides convincing evidence that the Voynich Codex is a post-Columbian manuscript. Although
most of the plants are indigenous to Mexico or their range extends to Mexico, a
number of plants are indigenous to North or South America (e.g., Caulanthus
heterophyllus), sometimes out of the region of New Spain. This problem can
be explained by the extensive trade routes of the Aztec merchants (pochteca).
(See Trade in Chap. 2.) Most of the phytmorphs may have been illustrated from
fresh specimens (e.g., Viola bicolor), but many seem to be drawn from dried samples (e.g., Duranta erecta), providing further evidence for purchase from the
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
211
extensive Mexica markets. “Hybrid phytomorphs” seem to be unique to this herbal,
perhaps to illustrate the use of two herbs within one preparation, or a mixture of
dried samples from which the artist prepared the illustration.
The methods of plant illustration in the Voynich Codex are not those of the native
Nahua of pre-Conquest New Spain, so what were their origins? Fray Motolinia, one
of the twelve Franciscan priests who accompanied Cortés, remarked that the Nahua
were extremely talented in copying Latin and Greek manuscripts, so much so that
the original and copy were indistinguishable (Motolinia 1951). The Spanish friars
routinely used European images of Biblical figures as inspiration for Nahua artists
(tlacuiloque) (Camelo Arredondo et  al. 1964; Morrill 2014). Furthermore, the
library of the Colegio de Tlatelolco, the school for the Nahua elite created after the
Conquest by Fray Zumarraga, the bishop of New Spain, had an eclectic collection
of books including 51 from Lyon, 51 from Paris, 35 from Venice, 22 from Salamanca,
20 from Antwerp, 19 from Basle, 13 from Mexico, 11 from Cologne, 19 from Aleala
de Henares, and 22 from Santiago de Tlatelolco (Gravier 2011).
The illustration style of plant illustrations in the Herbal section of the Voynich
Codex, such as individual naturalistic illustrations interspersed with text, is common
in ancient Dioscoridean illustrated herbals, such as the Juliana Anica Codex of 512
(Blunt and Raphael 1979; Collins 2000; Janick and Hummer 2012); they were continuously recopied for a millennium. Naturalism was reintroduced in the herbals of
the Secreta Saliterniana, an Arab-influenced school based in Salerno, which also
contain many of the iconographic features of the Voynich Codex. These Salernoinspired herbals range in time from the Tractatus de herbis, British Museum,
Egerton 747 of the first third of the fourteenth century, to the many variations of the
Livre des Simples Médecines of the end of the 14th to first half of the fifteenth century (Collins 2000). The Salerno school greatly impacted European herbals prior to
the Conquest of New Spain. There may have been European herbals in the wellstocked library of the Tlatelolco Colegio that influenced the Voynich Codex, as well
as other herbals executed by native tlacuiloque. However, caution must be exercised
until antecedent herbals can be identified (Emmart 1940; Peterson 1988).
It is likely that species identifications will be expanded and refined in the future as
more taxonomists with expertise in Mexican, Mesoamerican, and New World flora
become involved. Furthermore, we anticipate that the identification of plants in the
Pharmaceutical section will be increased, as many are labeled in Voynichese.
Likewise, the two vegetative phytomorphs in the Herbal section (fol. 27r, right side;
fol. 52v) might be identified some day from the text. Because many are sketchily
drawn and sometimes are limited only to roots or leaves, usually without inflorescences, it unlikely that the identification can be made on the morphology alone.
Conclusion
212
Literature Cited
Abdel-Hady, N.M., G.T.M. Dawoud, A.A. El-Hela, and T.A. Morsy. 2011. Interrelation of antioxidant, anticancer and antilieshmania effects of some selected Egyptian plants and their phenolic
constituents. Journal of the Egyptian Society of Parasitology 41: 785–800.
Abdullah, E., R. Ahmad Raus, and P. Jamal. 2011. Evaluation of antibacterial activity of flowering
plants and optimization of process conditions for the extraction of antibacterial compounds from
Spathiphyllum cannifolium leaves. African Journal of Biotechnology 10 (81): 18679–18689.
Achigan-Dako, E.G., M.W.  Pasquini, F.  Assogba-Komlan, S.  N’danikou, H.  Yédomonhan,
A.  Dansi, and B.  Ambrose-Oji. 2010. Traditional vegetables in Benin. Cotonou: Institut
National des Recherches Agricoles du Bénin, Imprimeries du CENAP.
Afzal, K., M. Uzair, B. Ahmad Chaudhary, A. Ahmad, S. Afzal, and M. Saadullah. 2015. Genus
Ruellia: Pharmacological and phytochemical importance in ethnopharmacology. Acta Poloniae
Pharmaceutica – Drug Research 72: 821–827.
Aguilar, R.  C. 2010. Plantas medicinales del Municipio de Tlalnelhuayocan, Veracruz. Thesis.
Universidad Veracruzana.
Al-Shehbaz, I.A. 2012. Brassicaceae. In The Jepson manual. Vascular plants of California, ed.
B.G. Baldwin, D.H. Goldman, D.J. Keil, R. Patterson, T.J. Bosatti, and D.H. Wilken, 2nd ed.,
512–577. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Alcántara Rojas, B. 2008. In Nepapan Xochitl: The power of flowers in the works of Sahagún.
In Colors between two worlds: The Florentine Codex of Bernardino de Sahagún, ed.
L.A. Waldman, 106–431. Florence: Villa I Tatti.
Alcorn, J.B. 1984. Huastec Mayan ethnobotany. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Alviz, A.A., R.D. Salas, and L.A. Franco. 2013. Efecto diurético agudo de los extractos etanólico y
acuoso de Ceratopteris pteridoides (Hook) en ratas normales. Biomédica 33: 115–121.
André, E. 1883. Onoseris drakeana. Revue Horticole 55: 180–182.
Argueta Villamar, A., L.  M. Cano Asseleih, and M.  E. Rodarte. 2009. Atlas de las Plantas de
la medicina tradicional Mexicana. Biblioteca Digital de la Medecina Tradicional Mexicana.
http://www.medicinatradicionalmexicana.unam.mx/atlas.php. 24 Jan 2014.
Asprey, G. F., and P. Thornton. 1953, 1954. Medicinal plants of Jamaica. Parts I and II. West Indian
Medical Journal 2(4):233–52, 3(1):17–41.
Austin, D.F., R.  Felger, and T.R.  Van Devender. 2005. Nomenclature of Ipomoea arborescens
(Convolvulaceae) in Sonora, Mexico. Sida 21: 1283–1292.
Ayensu, E.S. 1981. Medicinal plants of the West Indies. Algonac: Reference Publications.
Barlow, M. 1986. The Voynich manuscript—by Voynich? Cryptologia 10: 210–216.
Batres, L.D.P., C.A.B. Alfaro, and J. Ghaemghami. 2012. Mesoamerica aesthetics: Horticultural
plants in hair and skin care. Chronica Horticulturae 50 (2): 12–15.
Bayer, R. J., A. L. Bogle, and D. M. Cherniawsky. 2006. Petasites. In: Flora of North America
North of Mexico. Vol. 20, Magnoliophyta: Asteridae, Part 7: Asteraceae, Part 2, ed. Flora of
North America Editorial Committee, 635–7. New York: Oxford University Press.
Belotto, E.M., T. Souza-Leal, A.L. Paraluppi, A.L.F.F. Furtado, F.O.G. Gaspi, and C. Pedroso-DeMorares. 2014. Caracterização anatômica, histoquímica e de classes de metabólitos secundários
de folhas de Guzmania lingulata (L.) Mez. Revista Brasileira de Plantas Medicinais 16:
127–134.
Berg, C.C. 2001. Moreae, Artocarpeae, and Dorstenia (Moraceae). Flora Neotropica 83: 1–346.
Berlin, E.A., and B. Berlin. 1996. Medical ethnobiology of the Highland Maya of Chiapas, Mexico:
The gastrointestinal diseases. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bertol, E., V. Fineschi, S.B. Karch, F. Mari, and I. Riezzo. 2004. Nymphaea cults in ancient Egypt
and the new world: A lesson in empirical pharmacology. Journal of the Royal Society of
Medicine 97: 84–85.
Betts, E.M. 1985. Thomas Jefferson’s garden book, 1766–1824. Philadelphia: American
Philosophical Society.
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
213
Blackman, B.K., M. Scascitelli, N.C. Kane, H.H. Luton, D.A. Rasmussen, R.A. Bye, D. Lentz,
and L.H. Rieseberg. 2011. Sunflower domestication alleles support single domestication center in eastern North America. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA) 108:
14360–14365.
Blaschke, M., M. Zehl, B. Hartl, C. Strauss, J. Winkler, E. Urban, G. Krupitza, and B. Kopp. 2017.
Isolation of eudesmanes from Pluchea odorata and evaluation of their effects on cancer cell
growth and tumor invasiveness in vitro. Phytochemistry 141: 37–47.
Bleiler, E.F., ed. 1976. Early floral engravings: All 110 plates from the 1612 “Florilegium” by
Emanuel Sweerts. New York: Dover Publications.
Blunt, W., and S. Raphael. 1979. The illustrated herbal. London: Thames and Hudson.
Borschenius, F., L.S. Suárez Suárez, and L.M. Prince. 2012. Molecular phylogeny and redefined
generic limits of Calathea (Marantaceae). Systematic Botany Bot. 37 (3): 620–635.
Borsutzky, M., T.  Passie, W.  Paetzold, H.M.  Emrich, and U.  Schneide. 2002. Hawaiianisch
Holzrose: (Psycho-)Pharmakologische Wirkungen der Samen der Argyreia nervosa. Der
Nervenarzt 73: 892–896.
Bown, D. 1988. Aroids, plants of the arum family. Portland: Timber Press.
Breedlove, D. E., and R. M. Laughlin. 1993. The flowering of man: A Tzotzil botany of Zinacantán,
2 vols. Smithsonian Contributions to Anthropology No. 35.
Buskuhl, H., R.A. Freitas, F. Delle Monache, A. Barison, F.R. Campos, Y.E. Corilo, M.N. Eberlin,
and M.W.  Biavatti. 2009. A new polyacetylene from Vernonia scorpioides (Lam.) Pers.
(Asteraceae) and its in vitro antitumoral activity. Journal of the Brazilian Chemical Society
20: 1327–1333.
Bye, R.A., and E.  Linares. 2013. Códice de la Cruz-Badiano: Medicine préhispánica. Primera
parte. Arqueología Mexicana 50: 7–91.
Bye, R.A., E. Linares, and D.L. Lentz. 2009. México: Centro de origen de la domesticación del
girasol. Tip Revista Especializada en Ciencias Quimico-Biológicas 12: 5–12.
Calzada, F., T. Juárez, N. García-Hernández, M. Valdes, O. Ávila, L. Mulia, and C. Velázquez. 2017.
Antiprotozoal, antibacterial and antidiarrheal properties from the flowers of Chiranthodendron
pentadactylon and isolated flavonoids. Pharmacognosy Magazine 13: 240–244.
Camporese, A., M.J. Balick, R. Avigo, R.G. Esposito, N. Morsellino, F. De Simone, and A. Tubaro.
2003. Screening of anti-bacterial activity of medicinal plants from Belize (Central America).
Economic Botany 87: 103–107.
Camelo Arredondo, R., J.  Gurría Lacroix, and C.  Reyes Valerio. 1964. Juan Gerson, Tlacuilo
de Tecamachalco. México: Departamento de Monomuntos Coloniales, Instituto Nacional de
Anthropolgia e Historia.
Castro, V., R. Murillo, C.A. Klaas, C. Meunier, G. Mora, H.L. Pahl, and I. Merfort. 2000. Inhibition
of the transcription factor NF-kB by sesquiterpene lactones from Podachaenium eminens.
Planta Medica 66: 591–595.
Chávez, M. C. 2006. Flora medicinal de San Bartolo Tutotepec, Hidalgo. Ph.D. Thesis, Universidad
Autónoma del Estado de Hidalgo, Pacuca de Soto, Hidalgo.
Chizmar Fernández, C. 2009. Plantas comestibles de Centroamérica. Costa Rica: Instituto
Nacional de Biodiversidad, INBio, Santo Domingo de Heredia.
Clausen, J., R.B. Channell, and U. Nur. 1964. Viola rafinesquii, the only Melanium violet native to
North America. Rhodora 66: 32–46.
Clayton, M., L. Guerrini, and A. de Avila. 2009. Flora: The Aztec herbal. London: Royal College
Enterprises.
Collins, M. 2000. Medieval herbals: The illustrative traditions. London: The British Library.
Compton, J.A., A. Culham, and S.L. Jury. 1998. Reclassification of Actaea to include Cimicifuga
and Souliea (Ranunculaceae): Phylogeny inferred from morphology, nrDNA ITS, and cpDNA
trnL-F sequence variation. Taxon 47: 593–634.
Conard, H.S. 1905. The waterlilies: A monograph of the genus Nymphaea. Washington, DC:
Carnegie Institution.
Correll, D.S., B.G. Schubert, H.S. Gentry, and W.O. Hawley. 1955. The search for plant precursors
of cortisone. Economic Botany 9: 307–375.
Literature Cited
214
de la Cruz, M., and J. Badiano. 1991. Libellus de medicinalibus indorum herbis. México: Fondo
de Cultura Económica.
de Ávila Blomberg, A. 2012. Yerba del coyote, veneno del perro: La evidencia lexica para identificar plantas en el Códice de la Cruz Badiano. Acta Botanica Mexicana 100: 489–526.
de Echegaray, E. 1889. Diccionario general etimológico de la lengua Española. Madrid: Tomo
primero. Ricardo Álvarez.
Díaz, J.L. 1976. Índice y sinonimia de las plantas medicinales de México. México: Instituto
Mexicano para el Estudio de las Plantas.
Díaz, J.L. 1977. Ethnopharmacology of sacred psychoactive plants used by Indians of Mexico.
Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology 17: 647–675.
Díaz-Castelazo, D., V.  Rico-Gray, P.S.  Oliveira, and M.  Cuautle. 2004. Extrafloral nectarymediated ant-plant interactions in the coastal vegetation of Verucruz, Mexico: Richness, occurrence, seasonality, and ant foraging patterns. Ecoscience 11: 472–481.
Dobkin de Rios, M. 1974. The influence of psychotropic flora and fauna on Maya religion. Current
Anthropology 15: 147–164.
Doskotch, R.W., and C.D. Hufford. 1969. Damsin, the cytotoxic principle of Ambrosia ambrosioides (Cav.) Payne. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 58: 186–188.
Dressler, R.L. 1953. The pre-Columbian cultivated plants of Mexico. Botanical Museum Leaflets
16: 115–172.
Dunmire, W.W. 2004. Gardens of New Spain: How Mediterranean plants and foods changed
America. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Dunn, D.B., and W.E.  Harmon. 1977. The Lupinus montanus complex of Mexico and Central
America. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 64: 340–365.
Ebihara, A., J.-Y. Dubuisson, K. Iwatsuki, S. Hennequin, and M. Ito. 2006. A taxonomic revision
of Hymenophyllaceae. Blumea 51: 221–280.
Emboden, W.A. 1979. Nymphaea ampla and other narcotics in Maya ritual and shamanism.
Mexico 1 (4): 50–52.
Emboden, W.A. 1981a. Transcultural use of narcotic water lilies in ancient Egyptian and Maya
drug ritual. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 3: 39–83.
Emboden, W.A. 1981b. Mayan-Egyptian uses of water lilies (Nymphaeaceae) in shamanic ritual
drug use. In Folk medicine and herbal healing, ed. G.G. Meyer, K. Blum, and J.G. Cull, 275–
286. Springfield: Charles C. Thomas Publishers.
Emboden, W.A. 1982a. The mushroom and the water lily: Literary and pictorial evidence for
Nymphaea as a ritual psychogen in Mesoamerica. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 5: 139–148.
Emboden, W.A. 1982b. The water lily and the Maya scribe: An ethnobotanical interpretation. New
Scholar 8: 103–127.
Emboden, W.A. 1983. The ethnobotany of the Dresden Codex with especial reference to the narcotic Nymphaea ampla. Botanical Museum Leaflets 29 (2): 87.
Emmart, E.W. 1940. The Badianus manuscript (Codex Barberini, Latin 241). Baltimore: John
Hopkins Press.
Encarcion Dimayuga, R., R.F.  Murillo, and M.L.  Pantoja. 1987. Traditional medicine of Baja
California Sur (Mexico). II. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 20: 209–222.
Estrada Lugo, E. 1989. El Códice Florentino: Su información etnobotánica. Colegio de México.
Postgraduados, Institución de Enseñanza e Investigación en Ciencias Agricolas, Montecillo.
Farfán, J.A.F., and J.G.R. Elferink. 2010. Ethnobotany and Aztec sexuality. Muenchen: Lincom
Europa.
Félix-Silva, J., R. Brandt Giordani, A. Antonio da Silva Jr., S. M. Zucolotto, and M. de Freitas
Fernandes-Pedrosa. 2014. Jatropha gossypiifolia L. (Euphorbiaceae): A review of traditional
uses, phytochemistry, pharmacology, and toxicology of this medicinal plant. Evidence-Based
Complementary and Alternative Medicine https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/369204.
Fernald, M.L. 1938. Noteworthy plants of southeastern Virginia. Rhodora 40: 434–459.
García Bidó, R. 2014. Voces de Bohio: Vacabulario de la cultura Taina. 2nd ed. ISBN:
978-1502964281.
Gates, W. 2000. An Aztec herbal: The classic codex of 1552. Mineola: Dover Publications, [first
publ. Maya Society 1939, Baltimore].
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
215
Goldberg, A. 1967. The genus Melochia L. (Sterculiaceae). In Contributions from the United
States National Herbarium, vol. 34, 191–363.
Gómez-Betancur, I., and D.  Benjumea. 2014. Traditional use of the genus Renealmia and
Renealmia alpinia (Rottb.) Maas (Zingiberaceae): A review in the treatment of snakebites.
Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Medicine 7: Suppl. 1):SS74–Suppl. 1):SS82.
González Stuart, A. 2004. Plants used in Mexican traditional medicine. http://www.herbalsafety.utep.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Plants-Used-in-Mexican-Traditional-MedicineJuly-04.pdf. Accessed 31 Dec 2012.
Graham, J.G., A. Pudicho Torres, M. Pinedo Ceciliio, and J. Schunke Vigo. 2004. Interesting use
of Calathea standleyi Macbride (Marantaceae). Heliconia Society International Bulletin 11
(1): 1–2.
Gravier, M.G. 2011. Sahagún’s codex and book design in the indigenous context. In Colors
between two worlds. Florentine Codex of Bernardino de Sahagún, ed. G. Wolf and J. Connors,
156–197. Milan: Officina Libraria.
Guerra, F. 1952. Indice etimologico. In Libellus de medicinalibus Indorum herbis. El manuscrito
pictórico mexicano-latino de Martín de la Cruz y Juan Badiano de 1552, ed. M. de la Cruz,
J. Badiano, and F. Guerra, 237–256. México: Estudio. Texto y Versión. Editorial Vargas Rea y
El Diario Español.
Hancock, J.F. 2012. Plant evolution and the origin of crop species. Wallingford: CABI.
Harter, A., K.A. Gardner, D. Falush, D.L. Lentz, R.A. Bye, and L.H. Rieseberg. 2004. Origin of
extant domesticated sunflowers in eastern North America. Nature 430: 201–205.
Heiser, C.B. 2008. How old is the sunflower in Mexico? Proceedings of the Natlional Academy of
Sciences (USA) 105: E48.
Hernández, F. 1942. In Historia de las Plantas de Nueva España, ed. I.  Ochoterena. Mexico:
Imprenta University.
Hernández, F., F. Celsi, F. Colonna, B. Deversini, J. Faber, J. Greuter, V. Mascardi, N.A. Recchi,
and J. Terentius. 1651. Rerum medicarum Novae Hispaniae Thesarus, seu, Plantarum animalium mioneralium Mexicanorum historia. Romae: Vitalis Mascardi.
Herrera, F. 2004. Hippocrene concise dictionary. Nahuatl-English, English-Nahuatl (Aztec).
New York: Hippocrene Books.
Hitziger, M. 2016. Mayan phytotherapy in Guatemala: A transdisciplinary study for ethnographic
documentation and local empowerment. Ph.D. thesis, ETH Zürich. https://doi.org/10.3929/
ethz-a-010735971.
Hodel, D.R. 1992. Chamaedorea palms. Lawrence: Allen Press.
Hough, W. 1908. The pulque of Mexico. Proceedings of the US National Museum 33: 577–592.
Hutton, K. 2010. A comparative study of the plants used for medicinal purposes by the Creek and
Seminole tribes. Ph.D. thesis, University of South Florida.
Ibarra-Manríquez, G., and G. Cornejo-Tenorio. 2013. El género Ficus (Moraceae), silvestres y
cultivados, de México. Rapid Color Guide #394. Chicago: Field Museum.
Janick, J., and K.E. Hummer. 2012. The 1500th anniversary 512–2012 of the Juliana Anicia Codex:
An illustrated Diorcoridean recension. Chronica Horticulturae 52 (3): 9–156.
Janick, J., and A.O. Tucker, eds. 2018. Unraveling the Voynich Codex. Cham: Springer Nature.
Janick, J., A. Whipkey, and J. Stolarczyk. 2013. Synteny of images in three illustrated Dioscoridean
herbals: Juliana Anicia Codex, Codex Neapolitanus, and Morgan 652. Notulae Botanicae Horti
Agrobotanici Cluj-Napoca 41 (2): 1–7.
Johnson, D.V. 1998. Tropical palms. Non-wood forest products 10. Rome: Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations.
Josabad Alonso-Castro, A., J.  Jose Maldonado-Miranda, A.  Zarate-Martinez, M.D.R.  JacoboSalcedo, C. Fernández-Galicia, L. Alejandro Figueroa-Zuñiga, N. Abel Rios-Reyes, M. Angel
de León-Rubio, N. Andrés Medellín-Castillo, A. Reyes-Munguia, R. Méndez-Martínez, and
C. Carranza-Alvarez. 2012. Medicinal plants used in the Huasteca Potosina, México. Journal
of Ethnopharmacology 143: 292–298.
Kabiru, A., and L.Y. Por. 2013. Elephantopus species: Traditional uses, pharmacological actions
and chemical composition. Advances in Life Science and Technology 15: 6–13.
Karttunen, F. 1983. An analytical dictionary of Nahuatl. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Literature Cited
216
Kennedy, D. 2010. Oaxaca al gusto: An infinite gastronomy. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Khachitpongpanit, S., S. Singhatong, T. Sastraruji, and C. Jaikang. 2016. Phytochemical study
of Ruellia tuberosa chloroform extract: Antioxidant and anticholinesterase activities. Der
Pharmacia Lettre 8 (6): 238–244.
Killip, E.P. 1938. The American species of Passifloraceae. Chicago: Field Museum Press. Fieldiana
19: 1–331.
Kim, H., Q.  Wang, C.F.  Shoemaker, F.  Zhong, G.E.  Bartley, and W.H.  Yokoyama. 2015.
Polysaccharide gel coating of the leaves of Brasenia schreberi lowers plasma cholesterol in
hamsters. Journal of Traditional and Complementary Medicine 5: 56–61.
Köhler, F.E., G. Pabst, W. Mülller, and K. Guinther. 1887. Köhler's Medizinal-Pflanzen in naturgetreuen Abbildungen mit kurz erläuterndem Texte. Germany: Gera-Untermhaus.
Konrath, E.L., B.M.  Neves, C. dos S.  Passos, P.S.  Lunardi, M.G.  Ortega, J.L.  Cabrera,
C.A. Gonçalves, and A.T. Henriques. 2012. Huperzia quadrifariata and Huperzia reflexa alkaloids inhibit acetylcholinesterase activity in vivo in mice brain. Phytomedicine 19: 1321–1324.
Král, M. 2014. Of dahlia myths and Aztec mythology: The dahlia in history. http://www.pugetsounddahlias.org/DahliaMyths.pdf. Accessed 28 Aug 2017.
Kuete, V., F.W.  Fokou, O.  Karaosmanoğlu, V.P.  Beng, and H.  Sivas. 2017. Cytotoxicity of the
methanol extracts of Elephantopus mollis, Kalanchoe crenata and 4 other Cameroonian medicinal plants towards human carcinoma cells. BMC Complementary and Alternative Medicine
17 (1): 280.
Lee, K.-H., T. Ibuka, H. Furukawa, M. Kozuka, R.-Y. Wu, H.H. Hall, and H.-C. Huang. 1980.
Antitumor agents XXXVIII: Isolation and structural elucidation of novel germacranolides and
triterpenes from Elephantopus mollis. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 68: 1050–1058.
Leighton, A. 1970. Early American gardens “for meate or medicine”. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Co.
Lentz, D.L., M.D. Pohl, J.L. Alvarado, S. Tarighat, and R. Bye. 2008a. Sunflower (Helianthus
annuus L.) as a pre-Columbian domesticate in Mexico. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences USA. 105 (17): 6232–6237.
Lentz, D.L., M.D. Pohl, and R. Bye. 2008b. Reply to Rieseberg and Burke, Heiser, Brown, and
Smith: Molecular, linguistic, and archaeological evidence for domesticated sunflower in
pre-Columbian Mesoamerica. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 105 (30):
E49–E50.
Linares, E., and R. Bye. 2013. Códice de la Cruz-Badiano: Medicine préhispánica. Segunda parte.
Arqueología Mexicana 51: 7–93.
Lindsay, R. 1994. Aztec fruit reappears in the mountains of Mexico. New Scientist 142(1922).
https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg14219220-800-aztec-fruit-reappears-in-the-mountains-of-mexico/. Accessed 8 May 2018.
Ma, X., C. Tan, D. Zhou, D.R. Gang, and P. Xiao. 2007. Huperzine A from Huperzia species--an
ethnopharmacolgical review. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 113 (1): 15–34.
Mali, P.Y., and S.S. Panchal. 2013. A review on phyto-pharmacological potentials of Euphorbia
thymifolia L. Ancient Science of Life 32: 165–172.
Marshall, K.D., and S.L. Thornton. 2018. Worse than the disease? The rash of Lomatium dissectum. Kansas Journal of Medicine 11 (2): 1–6.
Martínez, A.L., A. Madariaga-Mazón, I. Rivero-Cruz, R. Bye, and R. Mata. 2017. Antidiabetic and
antihyperalgesic effects of a decoction and compounds from Acourtia thurberi. Planta Medica
82: 534–544.
Martinez, M. 1969. Las plantas medicinales de Mexico. Fifth ed. Mexico: Ediciones Botas.
Mathias, M.E., and L.  Constance. 1941. A synopsis of North American species of Eryngium.
American Midland Naturalist 24: 361–87M.
McDonald, J.A., and B. Stross. 2012. Water Lily and the Cosmic Serpent: Equivalent conduits of
the Maya spirit realm. Journal of Ethnobiology 32: 74–107.
McMahon, B. 1806. The American gardener’s calendar. Philadelphia: B. Graves.
McPherson, G. 1981. Studies in Ipomoea (Convolvulaceae) I. The Arborescens group. Annals of
the Missouri Botanical Garden 68: 527–545.
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
217
Mears, J.  1980. The evolution of the pseudoguaianolides of Parthenium L. (Asteraceae,
Ambrosiinae). Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia 132: 156–172.
Meira, M., E.P. da Silva, J.M.  David, and J.P.  David. 2012. Review of the genus Ipomoea:
Traditional uses, chemistry and biological activities. Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia 22:
682–713.
Meyer, F.C. 1951. Valeriana in North America and the West Indies (Valerianaceae). Annals of the
Missouri Botanical Garden 38: 377–503.
Mickel, J.T., and A.R. Smith. 2004. The pteridophytes of Mexico. New York: New York Botanical
Garden.
Miller, M.D. 1970. Isolation and identification of isolysergic acid amide and isolysergic acid
amide as the principal ergoline alkaloids in Argyreia nervosa, a tropical wood rose. Journal of
the Association of Official Analytical Chemists 53: 123–128.
Millspaugh, C.F. 1892. American medicinal plants. Philadelphia: Yorston & Co.
Miranda, F., and J. Valdés. 1964. Comentarios botánicos. In Libellus de medicinalibus indorum
herbis manuscrito Azteca de 1552 segun traduccion Latina de Juan Badiano version Espanola
con estudios y comentarious por diversos autores, ed. M. de la Cruz, 243–284. México:
Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social.
Moerman, D.E. 1998. Native American ethnobotany. Portland: Timber Press.
Moerman, D.E. 2009. Native American Medicinal Plants: An Ethnobotanical Dictionary. Portland:
Timber Press.
Moody, M.L., and L.H. Rieseberg. 2012. Sorting through the chaff, nDNA gene trees for phylogenetic inference and hybrid identification of annual sunflowers (Helianthus sect. Helianthus).
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 64: 145–155.
Moore, M. 1990. Los remedios: Traditional herbal remedies of the Southwest. Santa Fe, NM: Red
Crane Books.
Morales, S.M., and H.O. Cruz. 2007. Manual de Medicina Veterinaria Tradicional en la Huasteca
Tamaulipeca, México. México: Instituto Tamaulipeco para la Cultura y Las Artes.
Morrill, P.C. 2014. The Casa del Deán: New World imagery in a sixteenth century Mexican mural
cycle. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Morton, J. K. 2005. Silene. In Flora of North America. Vol. 5, Magnoliophyta: Caryophyllidae,
part 2, Flora of North America Editorial Committee (ed.), 168–216. New  York: Oxford
University Press.
Motolinia, T. de. 1951. Motolinia’s history of the Indians of New Spain. Transl. F.B.  Steck.
Washington, DC: Academy of American Franciscan History.
Nana, F.W., A. Hilou, J.F. Millogo, and O.G. Nacoulma. 2012. Phytochemical composition, antioxidant and xanthine oxidase inhibitory activities of Amaranthus cruentus L. and Amaranthus
hybridus L. extracts. Pharmaceuticals 5: 613–628.
Navarrete, A., D. Niño, B. Reyes, C. Sixtos, E. Aguirre, and E. Estrada. 1990. On the hypocholesteremic effect of Eryngium heterophyllum. Fitoterapia 61: 183–184.
Nieland, L., and W. Finley. 2009. Lone star wildflowers, 164–165. Lubbock: Texas Tech University
Press.
Nesom, G.L. 1983. The evolutionary history if Blumea viscosa (Asteraceae) and a first report from
North America. Sida 10: 30–32.
Ngadjui, B.T., and B.M. Abegaz. 2003. The chemistry and pharmacology of the genus Dorstenia
(Moraceae). Studies in Natural Products Chemistry 29: 761–805.
Ocaranza, F. 2011. Historia de la medicina en México. 2nd ed. Cauhtémoc, México: Cien de
Mexico.
Odonne, G., G.  Herbette, V.  Eparvier, G.  Bourdy, R.  Rojas, M.  Sauvain, and D.  Stien. 2010.
Antileishmanial sesquiterpene lactones from Pseudelephantopus spicatus, a traditional
remedy from the Chayahuita Amerindians (Peru). Part III. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 137:
875–879.
Olajuyigbe, O., and A. Ashafa. 2014. Chemical composition and antibacterial activity of essential
oil of Cosmos bipinnatus Cav. leaves from South Africa. Iranian Journal of Pharmaceutical
Research 13: 1417–1423.
Literature Cited
218
O’Neill, H. 1944. Botanical observations on the Voynich MS. Speculum 19: 126.
Ooi, K.L., T.S. Tengku Muhammad, L.Y. Lam, and S.F. Sulaiman. 2014. Cytotoxic and apoptotic effects of ethyl acetate extract of Elephantopus mollis Kunth. In human liver carcinoma
HepG2Cells through caspase-3 activation. Integrative Cancer Therapies 13 (3): NP1–NP9.
Ortiz de Montellano, B. 1975. Empirical Aztec medicine. Science 188: 215–220.
Ortiz de Montellano, B. 1990. Aztec medicine, health, and nutrition. New Brunswick: Rutgers
University Press.
Pagno, T., L.Z. Blind, M.W. Biavatti, and M.R.O. Kreuger. 2006. Cytotoxic activity of the dichloromethane fraction from Vernonia scorpioides (Lam.) Pers. (Asteraceae) against Ehrlich’s
tumor cells in mice. Brazilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research 39: 1483–1491.
Paniagua-Ibáñez, M., A.  López-Caamal, P.  Mussali-Galante, E.  Sánchez-Salinas, Ma.L.  OrtizHernández, R. Ramírez-Rodríguez, and E. Tovar-Sánchez. 2015. Morphological variation of
Cosmos bipinnatus (Asteraceae) and its relation to abiotic variables in Central Mexico. Revista
Chilena de Historia Natural 88: 14.
Pardeshi, M.H., A.A. Deshmukh, and K.A. Gajare. 2017. Ruellia tuberosa Linn. Acts as an antifertility agent that reduces sperm count, motility and viability in male Swiss albino mice (Musmusculus). International Journal of Current Pharmaceutical Research 9 (1): 105–109.
Park, M.S., and P.E. Elvander. 2012. Saxifragaceae. In The Jepson manual. Vascular plants of
California, ed. B.G.  Baldwin, D.H.  Goldman, D.J.  Keil, R.  Patterson, T.J.  Bosatti, and
D.H. Wilken, 2nd ed., 1234–1244. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Pereda-Miranda, R., D. Rosas-Ramírez, and J. Castañeda-Gómez. 2010. Resin glycosides from the
morning glory family. Fortschritte der Chemie Organischer Naturstoffe 92: 77–153.
Peterson, J.F. 1988. The Florentine Codex imagery and the colonial tlacuilo. In The work of
Bernardino de Sahagun, pioneer ethnographer of sixteenth-century Aztec Mexico, ed. J. Klor
de Alva, H.B. Nicholson, and E. Quiñones Keber, 273–293. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Polllard, A.J. 1986. Variation in Cnidoscolus texanus in relation to herbivory. Oecologia 70: 411–413.
Pollo, L.A.E., C.F.  Bosi, A.S.  Leite, C.  Rigotto, J.  Kratz, C.M.O.  Simões, D.E.P.  Fonseca,
D.  Coimbra, G.  Caramori, A.  Nepel, F.R.  Campos, A.  Barison, and M.W.  Biavatti. 2013.
Polyacetylenes from the leaves of Vernonia scorpioides (Asteraceae) and their antiproliferative
and antiherpetic activities. Phytochemistry 95: 375–383.
Prather, L.A. 1999. Systematics of Cobaea (Polemoniaceae). Systematic Botany Monographs
American Society of Plant Taxonomists 57: 1–81.
Ragasa, C., A.B.  Alimboyoguen, and C.-C.  Shen. 2009. Antimicrobial triterpenoids from
Elephantopus mollis. NRCP Research Journal 10 (1): 33–38.
Rajalakshmi, P., V. Sumathi, and M. Pugalenth. 2016. Antioxidant activity of Erigeron karvinskianus DC. and Ageratina adenophora (Spreng.) King (leaves). International Journal of Food
Science and Nutrition 1 (5): 64–68.
Ramírez, J., and G.V.  Alcocer. 1902. Sinonimia vulgar y científica de las plantas mexicanas.
Mexico: Oficina Tipográfica de la Secretaría de Fomento.
Rands, R.L. 1953. The water lily in Maya art: A complex of alleged Asiatic origin. Anthropological
Papers No. 34. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 151: 75–153.
Rauha, L.K., C.D.S.  Horinouchi, A.M.V.  Loddi, E.F.  Pietrovski, R.  Neris, F.  Souza-FonsecaGuimarães, D.F.  Buchi, M.W.  Biavatti, M.F.  Otuki, and D.A.  Cabrini. 2011. Effectiveness
of Vernonia scorpioides ethanolic extract against skin inflammatory processes. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 138: 390–397.
Rausa, Ahmad, R.  Norhayati Abdullahb, N.  Fakhriah Ismaila, and M.  Shahbuddina. 2015.
Extraction and evaluation of anti inflammatory activity of Spathiphylllum cannifolium. Jurnal
Teknologi (Sciences & Engineering) 77 (24): 89–93.
Redonda-Martinez, R. 2017. Diversidad y distribución de la tribu Vernonieae (Asteraceae) en
México. Acta Botanica Mexicana (119): 115–138.
Reko, B.P. 1947. Nombres bótanicos del manuscrito Badiano. Boletín de la Sociedad Botánica de
México 5: 23–43.
Richards, J.H., M.  Dow, and T.  Troxler. 2010. Modeling Nymphoides architecture: A morphological analysis of Nymphoides aquatica (Menyanthaceae). American Journal of Botany 97:
1761–1771.
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
219
Rico-Gray, V. 1993. Use of plant-derived food resources by ants in the dry tropical lowlands of
coastal Verucruz, Mexico. Biotropica 25: 301–315.
Rieseberg, L., and J.M. Burke. 2008. Molecular evidence and the origin of the domesticated sunflower. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 105 (30): E46.
Roberts, E. and A. Hill. 2009. Opuntia chaffeyi. Tephrocactus Study Group 15(2):28–30. http://
tephro.com/index.php/the-journal/article-index-by-title.html?id=21. Accessed 5 Oct 2018.
Ross-Ibarra, J., and A. Molina-Cruz. 2002. The ethnobotany of chaya (Cnidoscolus aconitifolius
ssp. aconitifolius Breckon): A nutritious Maya vegetable. Economic Botany 56: 350–365.
Roys, R.L. 1976. The ethno-botany of the Maya. Suppl. S. Cosminsky. Philadelphia: Institute for
the Study of Human Issues.
Ruiz-López, M.A., P.M. Garcia-López, R. Rodríguez, and J.F. Zamora Natera. 2010. Mexican wild
lupines as a source of quinolizidine alkaloids of economic potential. Polibotánica 29: 159–164.
Russell, N.H. 1965. Violets (Viola) of Central and Eastern United States: An introductory survey.
Sida 2: 1–113.
Safford, W.E. 1912. Sacred flowers of the Aztecs. Volta Review 14: 87–93.
Sahagún, B. de. 1963. Florentine Codex general history of the things of New Spain. Book 11 –
Earthly things. Transl. C. E. Dibble and A. J. A. Anderson. Salt Lake City: University of Utah
Press.
Sandoval, E., R.A. Bye, G. Rios, and M.I. Aguilar. 2005. Microscopic analysis and histochemical
observations of the medicinal root of Iostephane heterophylla. Boletin de la Sociedad Botánica
de México 77: 65–73.
Seelinger, M., R.  Popescu, P.  Seephonkai, J.  Singhuber, B.  Giessrigl, C.  Unger, S.  Bauer,
K.-H.  Wagner, M.  Fritzer-Szekeres, T.  Szekeres, R.  Diaz, F.M.  Tut, R.  Frisch, B.  Feistel,
B.  Kopp, and G.  Krupitza. 2012. Fractionation of an extract of Pluchea odorata separates a property indicative for the induction of cell plasticity from one that inhibits a neoplastic phenotype. Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2012/701927.
Sharma, P., and R. Vijayvergia. 2013. In vitro α-amylase inhibitory activity and GC-MS analysis of
Petrea volubilis. International Journal of Science and Research 4 (4): 190–194.
Shinners, L.H. 1961. Viola rafinesquii: Nomenclature and native status. Rhodora 63: 327–335.
Siméon, R. 2010. Diccionario de la lengua Nahuatl o Mexicana. México: Siblo Veintiuno.
Song, H., Z. Zheng, J. Wu, Jia Lai, Q. Chu, and X. Zheng. 2016. White pitaya (Hylocereus undatus) juice attenuates insulin resistance and hepatic steatosis in diet-induced obese mice. PLoS
One 11 (2): e0149670.
Sousa, S.M., and V.E.  Rudd. 1993. Revision del Genero Styphnolobium (Leguminosae:
Papilionoideae: Sophoreae). Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 80: 270–283.
Stockdale, M.K., and S.E.  Bryenton. 1978. Indian plant foods of the Florida Panhandle. The
Florida Anthropologist 31 (3): 109–116.
Standley, P.C. 1914. A revision of the genus Cobaea. Contributions from the United States National
Herbarium 17: 448–458.
Standley, P.C. 1920–1926. Trees and shrubs of Mexico. Contributions from the United States
National Herbarium 23: 1–1721.
Standley, P. C and L. O. Williams. 1973. Labiatae, mint family. In Flora of Guatemala, ed. P. C.
Standley and L. O. Williams. Part IX, No. 3. Fieldiana 24:237–317.
Subba, B., and R.C.  Kandel. 2012. Chemical composition and bioactivity of essential oil of
Ageratina adenophora from Bhaktapur District of Nepal. Journal of Nepal Chemical Society
30: 78–86.
Swan, D.C. 2010. The North American lotus (Nelumbo lutea Willd.); Sacred food of the Osage
People. Ethnobotany Research & Applications 8: 249–253.
Taiz, L., and S.L. Taiz. 2011. The biological section of the Voynich manuscript: A textbook of
medieval plant physiology. Chronica Horticulturae 51 (2): 9–23.
The Plant List. 2013. Version 1.1. Published on the Internet; http://www.theplantlist.org/.
Therrell, L., D. Cole, V. Claassen, C. Ryan, and M. A. Davies. 2006. Plant selection, collection,
and propagation techniques. Wilderness and backcountry site restoration guide. USDA Forest
Service. https://www.fs.fed.us/t-d/pubs/htmlpubs/htm06232815/page11.htm#310. Accessed 5
June 2018.
Literature Cited
220
Tilley, D., L. St, D. John, N. Shaw Ogle, and J. Cane. 2010. Plant guide for fernleaf biscuitroot
(Lomatium dissectum). USDA-Natural Resources Conservation Service. Aberdeen: Idaho Plant
Materials Center.
Tucker, A.O., and J.  Janick. 2016. Identification of phytomorphs in the. Voynich Codex
Horticultural Reviews 44: 1–64.
Tucker, A.O., and J.  Janick. 2018. Phytomorph and geomorph identification, chapter 4. In
Unravelling the Voynich Codex, ed. J. Janick and A.O. Tucker. Cham: Springer Nature.
Tucker, A.O., and R.H. Talbert. 2013. A preliminary analysis of the botany, zoology, and mineralogy of the Voynich manuscript. HerbalGram 100: 70–85.
USDA, ARS. 2015. National Genetics Resources Program. Germplasm Resources Information
Network – GRIN [Online Database]. National Germplasm Resources Laboratory, Beltsville,
Maryland. http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/html/taxgenform.pl. 4 Oct 2018.
Valdés Gutiérrez, J., H.  Flores Olivera, and H.  Ochoterena-Booth. 1992. La botánica en el
Codice de la Cruz. In Estudios actuales sobre el libellus de medicinalibus Indorum herbis,
ed. J. Kumate, M.E. Pineda, C. Viesca, J. Sanfilippo, I. de la Peña Páez, J. Valdéz Gutiérrez,
H.  Flores Olivares, H.  Ochoterena-Booth, and Z.  Lozoya, 129–180. México: Secretaria de
Salud.
Vázquez García, M., G. Lino von Poser, M. Apel, R. Cerros Tlatilpa, A. Mendoza-Ruiz, M. Luisa
Villarreal, A. Teresinha Henriques, and A. Cardoso Taketa. 2017. Anticholinesterase activity and identification of huperzine A in three Mexican lycopods: Huperzia cuernavacensis, Huperzia dichotoma and Huperzia linifolia (Lycopodiaceae). Pakistan Journal of
Pharmaceutical Sciences 30 (1. Suppl): 235–239.
Velázquez, C., F. Calzada, B. Esquival, E. Barbosa, and S. Calzada. 2009. Antisecretory activity from the flowers of Chiranthodendron pentadactylon and its flavonoids on intestinal fluid
accumulation induced by Vibrio cholerae toxin in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 126:
455–458.
Villaseñor, J.L. 2016. Checklist of the native vascular plants of Mexico. Revista Mexicana de
Biodiversidad 87: 559–902.
Vogel, S. 2015. Vertebrate pollination in Compositae: Floral syndromes and field observations.
Stapfia 103: 5–26.
Walshe-Roussel, B. 2014. An ethnobiological investigation of Q’eqchi’ Maya and Cree of Eeyou
Istchee immunomodulatory therapies. Ph.D. thesis, University of Ottawa, Canada.
Watson, T.J. 1977. The taxonomy of Xylorhiza (Asteraceae, Astereae). Brittonia 29: 199–216.
Whitley, G.R. 1985. The medicinal and nutritional and properties of Dahlia spp. Journal of
Ethnopharmacology 14: 75–82.
Wiersema, J.H., A.R.  Novelo, and J.R.  Bonilla-Barbosa. 2008. Taxonomy and typification of
Nymphaea ampla (Salisb.) DC. sensu lato (Nymphaeaceae). Taxon 57 (3): 967–974.
Williams, D.E. 1993. Lycianthes moziniana (Solanaceae): An underutilized Mexican food plant
with new crop potential. Economic Botany 47: 387–400.
Winther, J.L., and W.E. Friedman. 2008. Arbuscular mycorrhizal associations in Lycopodiaceae.
New Phytologist 177: 790–801.
Witters, W.L. 1975. Extraction and identification of clavine and lysergic acid alkaloids from morning glories. Ohio Journal of Science 75 (4): 198–201.
Wunderlin, R. P., B. F. Hansen, A. R. Franck, and F. B. Essig. 2018. Atlas of Florida plants. https://
cdn.plantatlas.org/img/specimens/USF/118489.jpg.
Zepeda, G.C., and L.O. White. 2008. Herbolaria y pintura mural: Plantas medicinales en los murals
del Convento del Divino Salvador de Malinalco. Estado de México. Polibotanica 25: 173–199.
4 Phytomorph Identification in the Voynich Codex
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019 221
A. O. Tucker, J. Janick, Flora of the Voynich Codex,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19377-5_5
Chapter 5
Aztec Plants in 16th Century New World
and European Herbals
Illustrated 16th Century Herbals of Aztec Plant Resources
Extensive book burning by the Inquisition in New Spain in the sixteenth century
(see Fig. 2.3) destroyed much contemporary information about Aztec plants.
However, detailed images and text of Aztec plants survive from a number of contemporary resources (Table 5.1):
• An Aztec herbal entitled Little Book of the Medicinal Herbs of the Indians
(Libellus de Medicinalibus Idorum Herbis), known as the Badianus Manuscript
or, more properly, Codex Cruz-Badianus of 1552.
• The 13 volumes of Bernardino de Rivera, known as Sahagún, entitled the General
History of the Things of New Spain, especially book XI, entitled Earthy Things
(Sahagún 1963), also known as the Florentine Codex, written between 1545 and
1590.
• Botanical works of Francisco Hernández, naturalist and protomedico, based on a
scientific expedition to New Spain between 1570 and 1577 but published later.
• The Voynich Codex, dated between 1565 and 1572 (Janick and Tucker 2018).
• The Spanish book Historia medicinal de las cosas que se traen de nuestras
Indias Occidentales (1569, 1571) of Nicolás Monardes, translated as Joyful
newes of the the newe found worlde by John Frampton (1577), consisting of
discoveries and reports of travelers and explorers in New Spain regarding plants,
animals, and minerals.
• Herball of John Gerarde (1597, 2nd ed. 1633).
222
Codex Cruz-Badianus
This seminal 1552 herbal was written and illustrated at the famous Colegio Imperial
de Santa Cruz at Taltelolco (Emmart 1940). This institution was formally established in 1536 at the site of an earlier school for Aztec elites (calmecac) to train sons
of the Aztec nobility for the clergy. It was strongly opposed by the Dominicans, who
questioned its orthodoxy and the ability of the natives to learn Christian doctrine,
concluding that they should not be baptized and therefore could not enter the priesthood. By 1555, the First Council of Mexico decreed as part of the doctrine of blood
purity (limpieza de sangre) that indigenous people, along with mestizos, Moors, and
mulattos, were banned from serving as priests (Kirk and Rivett 2014:293).
The Colegio (under the deanship of Sahagún) became the intellectual center
of New Spain. Many of the indigenous students, such as Antonio Valeriano, Martin
Jacovita, and Pedro de San Buenaventura, had extraordinary talents and great
Table 5.1 New world species listed in herbals of New Spain and Europe
Herbal Year written Total phytomorphs New world plants illustrated
New Spain
Codex
Cruz-Bandianusa
1522 184 All
Florentine Codexb 1545–1590, ca. 385 All
Hernández c 1570–1577 683 All
Voynich Codex 1565–1572 est. 359 169/170f
Europe
Monardesd 1569, 1574, 1577, 1580 10 est. 6g
Gerardee 1597, 1633 2766 >27h
a
Libellus de Medicinalibus Idorum Herbis, 1522 b
Florentine Codex. General history of the things of New Spain, 1951–1982 c
Rerum medicarum Novae Hispaniae Thesaurus, seu, Plantarum animalium mineralium
Mexicanorum historia, 1651 d
Joyfull newes of the newe founde worlde, 1577 e
Herball, amended edition of 1633 with sixteenth century woodcuts f
One species, Tragopogon porrifolius, a European species, is probably a late introduction to
Mexico as a contaminant of imported wheat or rye
g
Tobacco (Nicotiana tobacco), sassafras (Smilax sp.), carlo sancto (unknown), guacatone,
(Chiranthodendron sp.), flower of mechoacan (Ipomoea jalapa?), fruit of balsam (species
unknown, could be Abies balsamea) h
Balsam tree (Abies balsamea), cacao (Theobroma cacao), capsicum peppers (Capsicum annuum),
datura (Datura metel), Drakes root (Dorstenia contrajerva), goldenrod (Soldigao canadensis),
guaicum (Guaiacum officinale), kidney bean (Phaseolus sp.), maize (Zea mays), marvel-of-theworld (Mirabilis jalapa), mechoacan (Ipomoea jalapa), pumpkins and squash (Cucurbita sp.),
milkweed (Ascepias syriaca), nightshades (Datura spp.), papaya (Carica papaya), passionflower
(Passiflora edulis), pineapple (Ananas comosus), potato (Solanum tuberosum), sassafras (Sassafras
albidum), smilax (Smilax ornata), sunflower (Helianthus annuus), sweetpotato (Ipomoea batatas),
tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum), tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), Virginia spiderwort (Tradescantia
sp.), yucca (Yucca sp.)
5 Aztec Plants in 16th Century New World and European Herbals
223
intellectual ability (Emmart 1940; SilverMoon 2007). The authors of the renowned
herbal known now as the Codex Cruz-Badianus were two indigenous members of
the Colegio: Martin (Martinus in Latin) de la Cruz and Juan Badiano (Juannes
Badianus in Latin), whose Spanish names were conferred upon their baptism. The
author, Martin de la Cruz, was the Colegio’s indigenous doctor, who gave instruction in medicine. The illustrator is unknown. Juan Badiano, a Latin teacher at the
Colegio and a former student, translated the Cruz text into Latin. He was born and
reared in the village of Xochimilco, the site of the famous “floating” gardens or
chinampas (SilverMoon 2007).
The herbal was sent to Spain as a gift soon after its completion in 1552 and was
not mentioned by Sahagún or Francisco Hernández. At least four copies were made.
The original was once owned by Cardinal Francesco Barberini, and it ended up in
the Vatican Library until 1990, when John Paul II returned it to Mexico. It now
resides in the National Institute of Anthropology and History in Mexico City. This
herbal contains colored illustrations and descriptions in Latin of 185 plants.
Florentine Codex
Bernardino de Rivera, a Franciscan friar, missionary priest, and ethnographer of the
Aztecs, was born in Sahagún, Spain (ca. 1499) and is generally known simply as
Sahagún (Fig. 5.1a). He arrived in New Spain in 1529, learned Nahuatl, and spent
more than 50 years studying the culture and history of the Aztecs; he also authored
a dictionary of Nahuatl and Spanish. Sahagún was one of the founders of the Colegio
de Santa Cruz at Tlatelolco in 1536 to train sons of the Aztec nobility to the priesthood. He served as dean in 1560, but retired to the main convent of San Francisco
in Mexico in 1563. He died in 1590.
Sahagún made the Colegio de Santa Cruz a center for research, translation, and
literary production, and it became a focus for the intellectual elite of New Spain. In
the 1540s, Fray Toribio de Benavente (1482–1568), who was one of the 12 apostles
of New Spain and was known as Motolinía (the poor one), charged Sahagún with
the task of collecting information on the Aztecs, resulting in the seminal work translated as the General History of the Things of New Spain, written in Nahuatl and
Spanish. Indigenous students at the Colegio de Santa Cruz served as translators and
mediators. This celebrated work represents a collaborative effort by Sahagún and
indigenous students and faculty to memorialize the preconquest culture of the
Aztecs (SilverMoon 2007).
The work was translated into Nahuatl in 1569, and the final copy was completed in 1585. Three revisions exist. As the best-preserved manscript resides in
Florence, it is usually referred to as the Florentine Codex, a premier example of
ethnology and a key resource for understanding Aztec culture. A recent English
translation, published in 12 volumes by the School of America, includes an insert
of 965 illustrations from the historian Francesco del Paso y Tonoso, of which
about 385 are plants.
Illustrated 16th Century Herbals of Aztec Plant Resources
224
Fig. 5.1 Herbalist portraits
5 Aztec Plants in 16th Century New World and European Herbals
225
The Botanical Works of Francisco Hernández de Toledo
(1514–1587)
Francisco Hernández (1514–1587), known as Pliny of the Indies, was a medical
doctor, naturalist, botanist, poet, and historian—truly a Renaissance man (Fig. 5.1b).
Born in La Pueble de Montalban, near Toledo, Spain, he served as court physician
to King Philip II in 1567. He is generally considered to have been of Jewish heritage, but the evidence is circumstantial; nothing is known of his early life (Varey
et  al. 2000a:33). In 1570 the king appointed him “General protomedico of our
Indies, islands and mainland of the Ocean Sea” and he embarked on a seminal scientific expedition to New Spain to study medicinal plants. Accompanied by his son
Juan, Hernández traveled for seven years, collecting and classifying specimens,
interviewing indigenous people through interpreters, and conducting medical studies (Varey 2000a). He was assisted by three indigenous painters (baptized Pedro
Vázquez and Antón and Baltasar Elías). He visited at least one of the Aztec botanical gardens. Hernández’s 2500-page manuscript covered 3000 plants. He returned
to Spain in 1577.
Parts of Francisco Hernández’s extensive descriptions of his findings were published in a translation in Mexico in 1615 entitled, Plantas y Animales de la Nueva
Espana, y sus virtudes por Francisco Hernández, y de Latin en Romance por Fr.
Francisco Ximenez (Varey 2000b). Over 1200 plants are included. A text of the
Roman edition of Hernández’s work, entitled Rerum Medicarum Novae Hispaniae
Thesaurus (1651) is available online, with 683 phytomorphs. The original mansucript was destroyed by fire in the Escorial in 1765.
Voynich Codex (1565–1572)
There are 359 plant images (phytomorphs) in the Voynich Codex, 131 in the Herbal
section and 228 in the Pharmaceutical Section (Janick and Tucker 2018). Chapter 4
of this book identifies 129 images of the Herbal section (98.5%) and 41 images
(18.0%) of the Pharmaceutical section.
Nicolás Bautista Monardes (1493–1585)
Nicolás Monardes, a physician and botanist, spent his entire life in Spain, where he
authored various books on medical matters (Fig.  5.1c). His most famous work,
Historia medicinal de las cosas que se traen de nuestras Indias Occidentales was
published in three parts (1565, 1571, and 1574.) and translated to English in 1577
by John Frampton as Joyful newes of the the newe found worlde. Although Monardes
never visited the New World, he had an extensive correspondence with various
Illustrated 16th Century Herbals of Aztec Plant Resources
226
travelers, missionaries, and explorers, who provided information regarding medical
uses of New World plants, animals, and minerals. He included only 10 woodcuts of
plants, the most notable being tobac(c)o and sassafras; none occurs in the Voynich
Codex, but an illustration of an armadillo is duplicated. The work was widely translated and may have been the impetus for King Philip II of Spain to send Francisco
Hernández to explore the medicinal plants of New Spain.
John Gerard(e) (1545–1612)
John Gerard (Latinized to Gerarde), a barber surgeon in London (Fig. 5.1d), is the
author of the best-known botanical work in Renaissance England (Arber 1938,
Janick et al. 2012). His famous Herball of 1597 (1800 illustrations) is based on an
incomplete translation of the Stripium Historiae Pemptades sex (1583) of the
Flemish botanist Rembert Dodoens (1517–1585), translated from Latin to English
by Robert Priest, a London physician. Gerard finished the task and reconfigured it
in the arrangement of Mathias de L’Obel and Petrus Pena’s Nova stirpium adveraria of 1570.
The graceful prose of Gerard contains interjected comments, many based on
plant performance in his gardens. The woodcuts used by Gerard were from the collection of Nicolaus Bassaeus of Frankfurt; these illustrations (about 1800, 16 original) were mostly recycled from the Eicones Plantarum seu stirpium or Kräuterbuch
of the German botanist Jacobus Theodorus Tabernaemontanus, published in 1590.
Gerard’s 1597 herball is famous for the first description and image of potato
(Solanum tuberosum). The amended edition of 1633, edited by the London apothecary Thomas Johnson, included new material, incorporating many more New World
crops, with 2766 woodcuts obtained from the publisher, Christophe Plantin
(1513–1588).
Plant Families, Genera, and Species of Mexico and the New
World
Diversity of Mexican Flora
There is great diversity of native vascular plants in Mexico. An inventory by Jose
Luis Villaseñor (2016) lists 297 families, 2854 genera, and 23,314 species (1039
species of ferns and lycophytes, 149 gymnosperms, and 22,126 angiosperms). The
floristic richness of Mexico is considered the fourth greatest in the world, and the
number of endemic species is second only to South Africa. Our objective is to compare the phytomorphs in the Voynich Codex with illustrations in four other sources:
5 Aztec Plants in 16th Century New World and European Herbals
227
the Codex Cruz Badianus herbal of 1522 (Emmart 1940); the illustrations in the
Florentine Codex of Sahagún, completed in 1585 (trans. by Dibble and Anderson
1963); illustrations of Francisco Hernández conpleted between 1570 and 1573 and
collected in the Rerum Medicarum Novae Hispaniae Thesaurus (1651) and Historia
de las Plantas de Nueva España (1942–1945); and the amended edition of the
famous 1597 English Herball of John Gerard, enlarged and revised by Thomas
Johnson in 1633.
Aztec Plant Names
Appendix A lists 1607 Aztec plant names from various sources. In this list, multiple
identifications were made of the same phytomorph because of their lack of critical
botanical characteristics. Furthermore, the species identifications were made by
non-botanists, by unknown methods. These identifications thus remain hypotheses
unless confirmed subsequently by later sources, and thus are not credited. Thirdly,
some of the previously identified splecies are not necessarily native to Mexico, but
native to surrounding areas of North and Central America and the West Indies; that
is, they could have been grown at one of the botanic gardens or obtained at one of
the large markets.
This list also includes a few words of non-Nahuatl that seem to have been used
in Central Mexico. A few introduced, non-native species, such as ginger, Zingiber
officinale Roscoe, or the weedy sow thistle, Sonchus oleraceus L., could have been
plausibly cited by the sixteenth century sources. Species that are actually native to
geographically distant areas and not introduced, and some other preposterous identifications, have been ignored: for example, Aloe variegata L., correctly Gonialoe
variegata (L.) Boatwr. & J.C. Manning of southern Africa, was identified in the
Florentine Codex by Estrada Lugo (1989). Species that are taxonomically incorrect
have also been discarded or modified; for example, Estrada Lugo (1989) claimed
Bourreria tenella Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth and Portulaca rubra L. in the Florentine
Codex, but these species were apparently never published (or at least not listed in
any modern databases). The citation of illegitimate names, such as Salvia polystachya Ortega by Estrada Lugo (1989) in the Florentine Codex, are a conundrum.
Some names, such as Saponaria americana by Estrada Lugo (1989) in the Florentine
Codex, appear to be entirely fictitious. Some Nahuatl names simply cannot be identified to species. Emmart (1940) created plate numbers for folio numbers of phytomorphs in the Codex Cruz-Badianus, but both are cited. There have been many
post–sixteenth century commentaries, which can be found in the Literature Cited
for Appendix A.
Plants cited as being used by the Nahua, arranged by family with updated nomenclature, are summarized in Appendix B. (Some species of bacteria and algae have
no Nahuatl name recorded). Of the 149 plant familes listed in Appendix B, 85 are
Plant Families, Genera, and Species of Mexico and the New World
228
unique to the other sixteenth century sources, 14 are unique to the Voynich Codex,
and 49 are found in both groups (Table  5.2). This represents 50.2% of the 297
familes in Mexico reported by Villaseñor (2016). Of the 1122 species listed in
Appendix B, 923 unique to sixteenth century sources, 175 are unique to the Voynich
Codex, and 24 are common to both. This would indicate that Nahua people were
aware of about 1122 species, representing 4.8% of the 23,313 species in Mexico,
attesting to the great botanical knowledge of the Aztecs.
Voynich Codex Phytomorphs
In the Voynich Codex, 170 of 359 phytomorphs are identified in Chap. 4, including
129 of 131 in the Herbal section and 41 of 229 in the Pharmaceutical section.These
consist of 136 genera (4.7% of the total in Mexico) and 64 families, 22.8% of the
Table 5.2 The 149 families of plants identified as used by the Nahuaa
The 86 families of plants identified from sixteenth century sources:
Adiantaceae, Adoxaceae, Aizoaceae, Alismataceae, Anacardiaceae, Alstroemeriaceae,
Altingiaceae, Amaryllidacea, Anacardiaceae, Annonaceae, Aristolochiaceae, Aspleniaceae,
Basellaceae, Begoniaceae, Berberidaceae, Betulaceae, Bignoniaceae, Bixaceae, Burseraceae,
Calophyllaceae, Cannabaceae, Cannaceae, Caprifoliaceae, Caricaceae, Chenopodiaceae,
Chrysobalanaceae, Combretaceae, Commelinaceae, Corariaceae, Cornaceae, Cupressaceae,
Cyatheaceae, Cyperaceae, Dilleniaceae, Ebenaceae, Ephedraceae, Equisetacreae, Fagaceae,
Garryaceae, Hydrangeaceae, Iridaceae, Juncaceae, Lauraceae, Loasaceae, Loganiaceae,
Loranthaceae, Lythraceae, Magnoliaceae, Malpighiaceae, Maracelianceae, Marciliaceae,
Melanthiaceae, Melastomataceae, Meliaceae, Menispermaceae, Molluginaceae, Myricaceae,
Myrtaceae, Nyctaginaceae, Orchidaceae, Orobanchaceae, Oxalidaceae, Pentaphylacaceae,
Phrymaceae, Phytolaccaceae, Picramniaceae, Piperaceae, Plantaginaceae, Plumbaginaceae,
Polygalaceae, Polypodiaceae, Portulacaceae, Primulaceae, Rhamnaceae, Rutaceae, Sapindaceae,
Sapotaceae, Selaginellaceae, Stegnospermataceae, Tropaeolaceae, Typhaceae, Vitaceae,
Vitariaceae, Xanthorrhoeaceae, Zamiaceae, Zygophyllaceae
The 14 unique families from the Voynich Codex:
Anemiaceae, Araliaceae, Cabombaceae, Grossulariaceae, Hymenophyllaceae, Nyctaginaceae,
Ophioglossaceae, Osmundaceae, Penthoraceae, Pteridaceae, Saxifragaceae, Schizaeaceae,
Taxodiaceae, Violaceae
The 49 families in both groups:
Acanthaceae, Amaranthaceae, Apiaceae, Apocynaceae, Araceae, Arecaceae, Asparagaceae/
Agavaceae, Asteraceae, Boraginaceae, Brassicaceae, Bromeliaceae, Cactaceae, Campanulaceae,
Caryophyllaceae, Convolvulaceae, Crassulaceae, Cucurbitaceae, Dioscoreaceae, Ericaceae,
Euphorbiaceae, Fabaceae, Geraniacea, Gesneriaceae, Huperziaceae/Lycopodiaceae, Lamiaceae,
Liliaceae, Malvaceae, Marantaceae, Menyathaceae, Moraceae, Nelumbonaceae, Nymphiaceae,
Onagraceae, Papaveraceae, Passifloraceae, Pinaceae, Poaceae, Polemoniaceae, Polygonaceae,
Ranunculaceae, Rosaceae, Rubiaceae, Salicaceae, Smilacaceae, Solanaceae, Urticaceae,
Valerianaceae, Verbenaceae, Zingiberaceae
a
134 (89.9%) were identified from sixteenth century sources; 64 (43%) were identified in the
Voynich Codex
5 Aztec Plants in 16th Century New World and European Herbals
229
total in Mexico. These 64 families represent 43.0% of the 149 families listed in
Table 5.2, summarized in a Venn diagram (Fig. 5.2). The actual numbers may be
higher, because 12 pages of the Herbal section are missing. As noted in Chap. 4, of
170 phytomorphs identified, only one (Tragopogon porrifolius) is an Old World
species, probably a late introduction to Mexico.
There were overlaps of 17 phytomorphs representing 15 families in the Voynich
Codex with the four herbal sources investigated (Fig. 5.3). Two phytomorphs show
overlaps in all five herbals (Opuntia sp., Capsicum sp); three overlap in four herbals
(Helianthus sp., Bocconia sp., Smilax sp.), four overlap in three herbals (Agave sp.,
Manihot sp., Taxodium sp., Passiflora sp.), and eight overlap in two herbals
(Chiranthodendron sp., Dahlia sp., Dorstenia sp, Iostephane sp., Ipomoea sp.,
Philodendron sp., Salix sp., Urtica/Urera sp.). Species overlap was also found for
armadillo (Dasypus sp.), New World placental mammals (Fig. 5.4).
The duplication of phytomorphs and families in the Voynich Codex with other
Mexican herbals in the sixteenth century as well as Gerard’s Herball is evidence
that the Voynich Codex must be included among contemprorary herbals devoted to
New World plants. Although ignored, the Voynich Codex needs to be considered as
one of the primary sources of early information on Mexican plants, taking its place
as one of the great resources of New Word botany.
Fig. 5.2 Venn diagram of the number of plant families of vascular plants from various sixteenth
century sources (149 total), identified in Table 5.2. There were 134 families from various sixteenth
century sources and 64 from the Voynich Codex, with 49 in common. A caveat for these figures
must be inserted here: The amorphous phytomorphs in sixteenth century illustrations often have
more than one identification from botanists
Plant Families, Genera, and Species of Mexico and the New World
230
Fig. 5.3 Examples of Phytomorph Overlaps in New World and European Sources. (For identification of Nahuatl names, see Appendix A. a
Illustrations from Emmart (1940); b
Illustration numbers
from Sahagún (1963); c
Page and Cap. numbers from Hernández (1651); d
Page, Cap., and Fig. numbers from Hernández 1942; e
Illustrations and names from Gerarde (1633))
Opuntia sp., Cactaceae
folio 100r#8 folio 49v
tlatoc nochtli
sown or planted
nopal
plate 433
nopalli
p. 78 Cap. 45c
nocheznopalli/
nopalnocheztli
p. 1512
Ficus indica The
Indian fig tree
Capsicum sp., Solanaceae
folio 101r#3
Capsicum
annnuum
Folio 46r
C. annnuum
plate 572
tlalamatl
p. 135 Cap. 3c
chilli
p. 364
Capsicum
longioribus
siliquis, Long
codded Ginny
Pepper
Voynich Codex
(1568–1572)
Cruz-Badianus
(1552)a
Sahagún
(1585)b
Hernández
(1651)c
 (1942)d
Gerarde
(1597, 1633)
e
5 Aztec Plants in 16th Century New World and European Herbals
231
Helianthus sp., Asteraceae
folio 93r plate 757
chimalacatl
p. 228, Cap. 15c
chimalatl peruina
p. 751 Flos Solis
maior, The
greater Sunfloure
(Dodoens, 1568)
Bocconia sp., Papaveraceae
folio 89v(2)
(foliage only)
folio 13v
cochizxihuitl
sleep herb
plate 536
cococ xiuitl
sleep herb
p. 158, Cap. 31c
cococ xihuitl
sleep herb
Smilax sp., Smilacaceae
folio 22v (roots
only)
folio 8v
tequammaytl
man eater’s
hand
p. 288, Cap. 41c
mecapatli paratla
mecapatli o
zarzaparrilla
p. 859 Smilax
peruviana, rough
bindeweed of
Peru
Voynich Codex
(1568–1572)
Cruz-Badianus
(1552)a
Sahagún
(1585)b
Hernández
(1651)c
 (1942)d
Gerarde
(1597, 1633)e
Fig. 5.3 (continued)
Plant Families, Genera, and Species of Mexico and the New World
232
Agave sp., Asparagaceae/Agavaceae
folio 100r#4 plate 596
metl
p. 270 Cap. 12c
metl
Manihot sp., Euphorbiaceae
folio 93v
M. rubricaulis
plate 440
quauhcamotli
M. esculenta
p. 116 Cap 21c
ytzticpatli
M. rubricaulis
Taxodium sp., Taxodiaceae
folio 100r #15
Taxodium sp., cf.
T. mucronatum
(T. huegelii, T.
mexicanum)?
plate 379
aueuetl
Taxodium
mucronatum
p. 92 Cap. 66 c
aueuetl &
ahoehoetl
ahoehoetl/aueue
tl/ahuehuetl
T. mucronatum
Voynich Codex
(1568–1572)
Cruz-Badianus
(1552)a
Sahagún
(1585)b
Hernández
(1651)c
 (1942)d
Gerarde
(1597, 1633)
e
Fig. 5.3 (continued)
5 Aztec Plants in 16th Century New World and European Herbals
233
Passiflora sp., Passifloraceae
folio 23v
Passiflora sect.
Decaloba
p. 301 Cap. 58 c
coanenepilli or
contrayerua
coanenepilli /
cohuanenepolli /
cuanenepilli
p. 1592
Clematis trifloia,
flos Passionis,
the Maracoc or
Passion Floure
Chiranthodendron sp., Malvaceae
folio 102r#11
Chiranthodendron
pentadactylon
p. 383 Cap. n/a c
macpalxochi
quahuitl
macpalxochi
quahuitl
Dahlia sp., Asteraceae
Folio 99v#18
Dahlia sp.
Vol 1, p.28, Cap.27.
Fig 8 d Acocotli
quauhnahuacense
Dahlia vaiabilis
Dahlia sp. aff. D.
coccinea
Voynich Codex
(1568–1572)
Cruz-Badianus
(1552)a
Sahagún
(1585)b
Hernández
(1651)c
 (1942)d
Gerarde
(1597, 1633)
e
Fig. 5.3 (continued)
Plant Families, Genera, and Species of Mexico and the New World
234
Dorstenia sp., Moraceae
folio 36v
Dorstenia
contrajerva
p. 1621
Drakena radix
Contra-yerva
Iostephane heterophyla, Asteraceae
folio 24v
I. heterophylla
Vol 1, p.116,
Cap.132, Fig.
5.34d
Acuitzehuariracu
a
Ipomoea sp., Convolvulaceae
folio 1v
I. arborescens
folio 9r
xiuhhamolli
herbaceous
soap. I.
murucoides
Voynich Codex
(1568–1572)
Cruz-Badianus
(1552)a
Sahagún
(1585)b
Hernández
(1651)c
 (1942)d
Gerarde
(1597, 1633)
e
Fig. 5.3 (continued)
5 Aztec Plants in 16th Century New World and European Herbals
235
Philodendron sp., Araceae
folio 100r #2
P. mexicanum
plate 709
uacalxochitl
P. tripartitum
Salix sp., Salicaceae
folio 100r#11
Salix sp.
plate 106
quetzala[h]uexot
l
/quetzalhuexotl/
quetzalauexotl/
quetzalāhuexōtl
precious willow
water
S. lasiolepis
Urtica/Urera sp., Urticaceae
folio 25r
Urtica
chamaedryoides
plate 26
atzitzicaztli
water nettle
Urera
caracasana
Voynich Codex
(1568–1572)
Cruz-Badianus
(1552)a
Sahagún
(1585)b
Hernández
(1651)c
 (1942)d
Gerarde
(1597, 1633)
e
Fig. 5.3 (continued)
Plant Families, Genera, and Species of Mexico and the New World
236
Conclusions
The information presented in this volume, The Voynich Flora: An Exploration of Aztec
Plants, can be summarized as follows:
• The Aztecs had a tremendous knowledge of plants based on their vast botanical
gardens, the number of plants named, plant expeditions, and knowledge of their
medical uses. Although fifteenth century plant books in Mexico have been lost,
a sixteenth century herbal, Codex Cruz Badianus of 1552 (written by indigenous
Nahuas), plus information obtained from the books of Sahagún, Hernández,
Monardes, and Gerard provides information about plants known to the Aztecs in
Colonial New Spain.
• Identification has been made of all but two of the 131 phytomorphs of the Herbal
section and of 41 of the 229 plants in the Pharmaceutical section in the Voynich
Codex. Each phytomorph has been described and information provided on distribution, names, and medicinal uses. Only one European species has been
described, providing hard evidence that the Voynich Codex is a manuscript of
sixteenth century Mexico in Colonial New Spain.
• The congruence of families, genera, and species with other sixteenth century
works on Aztec plants confirms that the Voynich Codex must be included as part
of the oeuvre of sixteenth century Aztec botany.
Literature Cited
Arber, A. 1938. Herbals: Their origin and evolution, a chapter in the history of botany 1470–1670.
Darien: Hafner Publishing Co.
Emmart, E.W. 1940. The Badianus manuscript (Codex Barberini, Latin 141) Vatican library. A Aztec
herbal of 1552. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Estrada Lugo, E. 1989. El Códice Florentino: Su información etnobotánica. México: olegio de
Postgraduados, Institución de Enseñanza e Investigación en Ciencias Agricolas, Montecillo.
Gerarde, J. 1597. The herball or general historie of plants. London: John Norton.
Gerarde, J, and T. Johnson. 1633. The herball or general historie of plants ….very much revised
and enlarged by Thomas Johnson. London: Adam Islip, Joice Norton, and Richard Whitakers
(Republished 1975. Mineola, MN: Dover).
Fig. 5.4 Armadillo (Dasypus sp.) illustrations: (a) Voynich Codex, folio 80v; (b) Sahagún 1963,
plate 201; (c) Monardes 1577; (d) Hernández 1651 (Varey 2000b, Fig. 59)
5 Aztec Plants in 16th Century New World and European Herbals
237
Hernández, F. 1942. Historia de las Plantas de Nueva España. Ed. I. Univ., Mexico: Ochoterena.
Imprenta.
Hernández, F., F. Celsi, F. Colonna, B. Deversini, J. Faber, J. Greuter, V. Mascardi, N.A. Recchi,
and J. Terentius. 1651. Rerum medicarum Novae Hispaniae Thesaurus, seu, Plantarum animalium mioneralium Mexicanorum historia. Romae: Vitalis Mascardi.
Janick, J., H.S.  Paris, and M.C.  Daunay. 2012. The cucurbits and nightshades of renaissance
England: John Gerard and William Shakespeare. Horticultural Reviews 40: 215–257.
Janick, J., and A.O. Tucker, eds. 2018. Unraveling the Voynich Codex: Mexican. Cham: Springer
Nature.
Kirk, S., and S. Rivett. 2014. Religious transformations in the early modern Americas. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Monardes, N. 1493–1588. Historia Medicinal de las Cosas que se traen de Nuestras Ind
Occidentales, Seville, Spain, 1565.
Monardes, N. 1577. Joyful newes out of the newe founde worlde. In wherein is declared the rare
and singular vertues of diverse…Herabes…Englished by John Frampton Marchaunt. London:
W. Norton.
Reko, B.P. 1947. Nombres bótanicos del manuscrito Badiano. Boletín de la Sociedad Botánica de
México 5: 23–43.
Sahagún, B. de. 1951–1982. Florentine Codex. General history of the things of New Spain
[1540–1585] 12 vol. Trans. A. J. O. Anderson and C. E. Dibble. Salt Lake City: University
of Utah Press.
Sahagún, B. de. 1963. Florentine Codex. General history of the things of New Spain. Book 11 –
Earthy things. Transl. C. E. Dibble and A. J. O. Anderson. Salt Lake City: University of Utah
Press.
SilverMoon. 2007. The imperial college of Tlatelolco and the emergence of a new Nahua intellectual elite in New Spain (1500–1760). PhD Thesis, Duke University, Durham.
Varey, S., R. Chabrán, and D.B. Wiener, eds. 2000a. Searching for the secrets of nature: The life
and works of Dr. Francisco Hernández. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Varey, S., R. Chabrán, and D.B. Wiener, eds. 2000b. The Mexican treasury: The writings of Dr.
Francisco Hernández. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Villaseñor, J.L. 2016. Checklist of the native vascular plants of Mexico. Revista Mexicana de
Biodiversidad 87: 559–902.
Literature Cited
© Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2019 239
A. O. Tucker, J. Janick, Flora of the Voynich Codex,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-19377-5
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used
by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
N.B. Not all plant names have been identified (yet), and those that lack identifications are indicated by “=?” only. Also, the same Nahuatl name may refer to more
than one species from different sources.
aauaton/haauaton=FC565=Gaultheria myrsinoides (Pernettya ciliata) (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
aacxoyatic/aacxoiatic/aacxoiatic/haacxoyatic=FC603=Ipomoea capillacea or
Polygala verticillata (Estrada Lugo 1989)
acabacahuitztli=Cynodon dactylon (Capriola dactylon) (Díaz 1976)
acacapacquilitl (aquatic edible herb that makes a slapping noise)=pl. 79 Badianus
(C-B fol. 44r)=FC=Jaegeria bellidiflora (Díaz 1976; Pico and Nuez 2000a;
Estrada Lugo 1989; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or Bidens laevis (B.
chrysanthemoides) (Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Jaegeria pedunculata (Linares and Bye 2013; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Aganippea dentata
(Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952)
acacapaxihuitl=Rorippa palustris (Díaz 1976)
açacatzontli/azacatzontli (aquatic grass hair/head)=pl. 79 Badianus (C-B fol.
44r)=Tillandsia chaetophylla (Reko 1947) or Bromeliaceae (Miranda and Valdés
1964) or Phragmites australis (P. communis) (Guerra 1952) or Cyperaceae? or
Juncaginaceae?
acacoyotl=p. 262 Hernandez Rerum/p. 112,113 Hernandez Historia=Polianthes sp.
or Lithospermum sp.? (Ramírez and Alcocer 1902) or Piper sanctum (Díaz 1976)
acahual=Bidens pilosa or Heterotheca inuloides (Díaz 1976)
acahuale=Bidens aurea or Simsia amplexicaulis (Díaz 1976)
acahualli=Helianthus annuus (Dressler 1953; Ramírez and Alcocer 1902)
acahualillo=Bidens laevis (Díaz 1976)
acahuatl=Heterotheca inuloides (Díaz 1976)
acaltzauhtli=Galeoglossum tubulosum (Cranichis tubulosa) (Díaz 1976;
Ossenbach 2009)
240
acamallotetl (acamallotl stone)=pl. 30, 48, 79, 113 Badianus (C-B fol. 18v, 28v,
44r, 61r)=Pouteria campechiana (Lucuma salicifolia) (Miranda and Valdés
1964) or Pachira aquatica (Guerra 1952)
acametl=FC=p. 273 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1053 Hernandez Historia=Agave atrovirens (Estrada Lugo 1989)
acaquilitl (edible herb similar to the reed)=FC=Bidens laevis (Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a)
acaquitl mecatl=Ipomoea nil (Díaz 1976)
acatl/ācatl (reed, primary name)=pl. 79 Badianus (C-B fol. 44r)=Phragmites australis (P. communis) (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989;
Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or Quercus laurina or Q.
polymorpha or Q. rugosa or Q. peduncularis (Díaz 1976)
acatzacuhtli=Galeoglossum tubulosum (Cranichis tubulosa)?
acaxaxan=p. 263 Hernandez Rerum/p. 92 Hernandez Historia=Tradescantia sp.?
acaxaxan=p. 263 Hernandez Rerum/p. 94 Hernandez Historia=Commelina sp.?
acaxilotic=FC=Plantago mexicana (Díaz 1976 ; Ortiz de Montellano 1975, 1990)
acatzan aycxitl=p. 340 Hernandez Rerum/p. 104 Hernandez Historia=Pellaea ternifolia (Díaz 1976)
acaxochitl=FC720a=p. 347 Hernandez Rerum/p. 95,96 Hernandez Historia=Lobelia
cardinalis (L. fulgens) or L. laxiflora (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
acaxochitl chichiltic=Lobelia cardinalis (L. fulgens) (Díaz 1976) or L. laxiflora
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
acecintle=Acer negundo (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
achachayotli=Urvillea ulmacea (Díaz 1976)
achichiantic=Salvia ballotifolia (Díaz 1976)
achichiantic yohalense=Salvia ballotiflora? (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
achichilacachtic=Ludwigia adscendens (Jussiaea repens) (Díaz 1976)
achilli/achilto/ā-chīlli (water pepper)=pl. 65 Badianus (C-B fol.
37r)=FC649=Persicaria hydropiper (Polygonum hydropiper) (de Ávila Blomberg
2012; Guerra 1952; Ortiz de Montellano 1990; Reko 1947) or Persicaria punctata (Polygonum acre) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Persicaria hydropiperoides (Polygonum hydropiperoides) (Díaz 1976; Linares and Bye 2013;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Euphorbia hypericifolia (Estrada Lugo 1989)
achiotl/achiotetl=p. 74 Hernandez Rerum=FC=Bixa orellana (Díaz 1976; Dressler
1953; Estrada Lugo 1989; Ocaranza 2011; Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
achochoquilitl/axoxoquilitl (edible herb with a nice taste)=FC=Bidens pilosa
(Estrada Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a; Estrada Lugo 1989) or B. laevis (B.
chrysanthemoides) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or B. aurea (B. tetragona)
(Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
acimpatli=Haplophyton cimicidum (Díaz 1976)
acocochtli=Arracacia atropurpurea (Díaz 1976)
acocoquilitl=Arracacia sp. (Díaz 1976)
acocote=Arracacia atropurpurea or Ipomoea wolcottiana (Díaz 1976)
acocotle=Bidens pilosa (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
241
acocotli/acocohtli/cocohtli (water-cane/water-pipe )=FC=Arracacia atropurpurea?
(Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952) or Dahlia sp. aff. D. coccinea? (de
Ávila Blomberg 2012; Reko 1947; Sorensen 1970; Zepeda and White 2008) or
Lagenaria siceraria (L. vulgaris) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or D. pinnata
(D. variabilis) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
acocotli quauhnahuacensi=p. 31 Hernandez Rerum/p. 28 Hernandez
Historia=Dahlia sp. aff. D. coccinea?
acocotli xalacocatli (hollow aquatic cane)=Arracacia atropurpurea (Pico and Nuez
2000b)
acocotlil tepoztlanensi=p. 31 Hernandez Rerum=Dahlia sp.?
acocoh[xihui]tl/acōcohtli (primary name, water gullet plant)=pl. 94 Badianus (C-B
fol. 51v)=Arracacia atropurpurea (Linares and Bye 2013; Guerra 1952; Miranda
and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Dahlia sp. (Guerra 1952)
acocoxiuitl=FC=Arracacia atropurpurea (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or A. trifida (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Dahlia coccinea (Estrada Lugo 1989)
acocoxochitic=Drymaria ovata (Díaz 1976)
acocoxochitl =FC=Dahlia coccinea or D. pinnata, or D. lehmannii (Díaz 1976 ;
Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Lobelia cardinalis or L. laxiflora (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
acotoli ligustici facie=p. 32 Hernandez Rerum=Dahlia sp.?
actimpatli=Haplophyton cimicidum (Díaz 1976)
acuyo/acueyo (quelite of the bubbled)=Piper auritum or P. sanctum (Díaz 1976 ;
Pico and Nuez 2000b)
acuilotl=Philadelphus coulteri (Díaz 1976)
acuitlacpalli=FC=Sagittaria macrophylla (Estrada Lugo 1989)
acuitzehuariracua=p. 254 Hernandez Rerum/p. 116 Hernandez Historia=Iostephane
heterophylla (Díaz 1976)
acxoyatic=p. 134 Hernandez Rerum/p. 37 Hernandez Historia=Polygala verticillata
or Ipomoea capillacea (Díaz 1976)
acxoyatl=p. 348 Hernandez Rerum/p. 40 Hernandez Historia=Asclepias linaria or
Abies religiosa (Díaz 1976)
acxoyatl (primary name)=pl. 95 Badianus (C-B fol. 52r)=FC=Pseudotsuga sp. (de
Ávila Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Abies religiosa (Estrada
Lugo 1989; Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez
et al. 1992)
ahacaxilotic=FC=Plantago mexicana (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ahaipuih=Plumeria rubra (P. acutifolia) (Díaz 1976)
ahate=Annona squamosa (Díaz 1976)
ahatede panucho/ahate depannuco/ahate penucino=p. 348, 454 Hernandez
Rerum/p. 74,75 Hernandez Historia=Annona squamosal?
ahoacaquahuitl=Litsea parvifolia or Persea americana (P. gratissima) (Díaz 1976)
ahoacatlmontes=Litsea parvifolia (Díaz 1976)
ahoapatlahuac=Quercus elliptica (Q. lanceolata) (Díaz 1976)
ahoaquahuitl=Quercus laurina (Q. berbineris) or Q. polymorpha or. Q. peduncularis (Q. tomentosa) or Q. rugosa (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
242
ahoatan/ahoaton/ahuaton=p. 211 Hernandez Rerum/p. 47 Hernandez
Historia=Gaultheria myrsinoides (Pernettya ciliata) (Díaz 1976)
ahoatepatli=Achimenes erecta (A. coccinea) (Díaz 1976)
ahoatetzmolin=Quercus elliptica (Q. lanceolata) (Díaz 1976)
ahoatl=Quercus acutifolia (Díaz 1976)
ahoaxaquahuitl=Persea americana (P. gratissima) (Díaz 1976)
ahoaxatl=Persea americana (P. gratissima) (Díaz 1976)
ahoaxocotl=Byrsonima crassifolia (Díaz 1976)
ahuacaquahuitl/ahoacaquahuitl/ahuacatl=FC=p. 89 Hernandez Rerum=Persea
americana (Farfán and Elferink 2010; Ortiz de Montellano 1975)
ahhuachcho/ tonatiuh yxiuh ahhauachcho (the sun’s dewy herb)=pl. 42, 51 Badianus
(C-B fol. 23v, 30r)=Malvaviscus sp. (Guerra 1952)
ahhuiyac tlatlanquaye (fragrant possessor of many knees)=pl. 83, 88 Badianus
(C-B fol. 46r, 48v)=Lamiaceae? or Peperomia sp. (Guerra 1952; Miranda and
Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or Capsicum sp.
ahoehoetl/aueuetl/ahuehuetl=p. 92 Hernandez Rerum/p. 148 Hernandez
Historia=Taxodium mucronatum (T. huegelii) (Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953; Estrada
Lugo 1989; Farfán and Elferink 2010)
ahquiztli/haquiztli/ā-quīztli (water comes out)=pl. 74, 75 Badianus (C-B fol. 41v,
42r)=FC=Amaranthus sp. (Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Amaranthus hybridus
(Linares and Bye 2013) or Rhus sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Toxicodendron
radicans (Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Anacardium sp.
(Estrada Lugo 1989) or Toxicodendron sp. (Guerra 1952)
ahuacatl/ahuatate=Persea americana (Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953; Farfán and
Elferink 2010)
ahuachpatli=Persea americana (P. gratissima) (Díaz 1976)
ahuahuaxochitl=Heliocereus speciosus (Díaz 1976)
ahuapatli/ahuapahtli/ahoapatli=p. 133 Hernandez Rerum/p. 49 Hernandez
Historia=Galinsoga parviflora (Díaz 1976) or Calea zacatechichi (Díaz 1976)
ahuatl tepiton (insignificant little oak)=pl. 86 Badianus (C-B fol. 47v)=Rhamnus
serrata (Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013; Reko 1947; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Quercus sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
ahuaxocotl=Malpighia glabra (Díaz 1976)
ahuehuecuahuitl=Taxodium mucronatum (T. huegelii) (Díaz 1976)
ahuehuete/ahuehuetl=Taxodium mucronatum (T. huegelii) (Díaz 1976)
ahuexocaquilitl (edible herb found in the ahuexotl [Salix sp.])=FC=Bidens aurea
(Estrada Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a)
ahuhuetl=FC=Bombax ceiba (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ahuichichi/ahuichichic=Cayaponia racemosa (Díaz 1976)
ahuiyac tlatancuaye=Capsicum annuum (Díaz 1976)
ahuiyacxiuitl (fragrant herb)=pl. 66 Badianus (C-B fol. 37v)=Lippia graveolens
(Guerra 1952)
aile=Alnus acuminata subsp. arguta (A. arguta) or Alnus jorullensis (A. firmifolia)
(Díaz 1976)
ailes/ailites=Agastache mexicana (Cedronella mexicana) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
243
aiotli/anozo yecayotlki=FC=Cucurbita maxima or Cucurbita sp. (Estrada Lugo
1989)
aitztolin=FC582=Rhynchospora corymbosa (R. aurea) (Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Cyperus sp.?
aja=Brosimum alicastrum (Díaz 1976)
aji=FC=Capsicum annuum (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ajocopaque=Gaultheria acuminata (G. ovata) (Díaz 1976)
ajopatla=Gaultheria acuminata (G. nitida) (Díaz 1976)
akitz=Cascabela gaumeri (Thevetia gaumeri) or Cascabela thevetia (Thevetia neriifolia, T. peruviana) or Cascabela thevetioides (Thevetia yccotli) (Díaz 1976)
akolqelite=Microsechium palmatum (M. helleri) (Díaz 1976)
alahoacapatli leptophyllo/leptofilo=p. 298 Hernandez Rerum/p. 12 Hernandez
Historia=Polemonium grandiflorum (Díaz 1976)
algodon=FC=Gossypium hirsutum (G. mexicanum, G. palmeri) (Estrada Lugo
1989)
amacapuli/amacapulin=FC=Morus celtidifolia (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989;
Standley 1920–1926:204)
amacoztic=p. 82 Hernandez Rerum/p. 251 Hernandez Historia=Ficus nymphaeifolia or F. petiolaris (Díaz 1976)
amacuahuitl=Cordia boissieri (Díaz 1976)
amamalacotl/anamalacotl/amalacotl (swirl of water)=FC647=Hydrocotyle ranunculoides (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Pico and Nuez 2000b) or Bryophyllum
pinnatum (B. calycinum) (Díaz 1976) or Bryophyllum sp. or Solidago paniculata
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
amamaxtla/amamaxtla purgante (aquatic belt)=FC=Rumex mexicanus (Díaz 1976;
Estrada Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a; Ortiz de Montellano 1990) or R.
patientia (Díaz 1976)
amapa=Cordia alliodora or Tabebuia heterophylla (T. pentaphylla) (Díaz 1976)
amaquahuitl=Cordia boissieir or C. tinifolia (Díaz 1976) or Ficus sp. (Altamirano
1896)
amaquauitl=FC=Ficus maxima (F. radula) (Standley 1920–1926:209) or F. cotinifolia or F. obtusifolia (F. involuta) or Cordia tinifolia (Estrada Lugo 1989)
amate=Ficus aurea (F. telcolutensis) or F. congesta (F. fasciculata) or F. insipida (F.
glabrata) or F. obtusifolia (F. involuta) (Díaz 1976)
amate amarillo=Ficus nymphaeifolia or F. petiolaris (F. jaliscana) (Díaz 1976)
amate blanco=Ficus insipida (F. glabrata) (Díaz 1976)
amate de madrono=Ficus pertusa (F. arbutifolia) (Díaz 1976)
amate de vara=Ehretia tinifolia (Díaz 1976)
amate prieto=Ficus aurea (F. tecolutensis) or F. maxima (F. guadalajarana) (Díaz
1976)
amatillo=Ficus pertusa (F. padifolia) (Díaz 1976)
amatlaxihoitl/amatlaxioitl=Rivina humilis (Díaz 1976)
amatzacuhtli/amatzauhtle=Prosthechea pastoris (Encyclia pastoris, Epidendrum
pastoris) or Laelia speciosa (Berdan 2007; Díaz 1976) or Encyclia concolor
(Berdan 2007)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
244
amatzauhtli=p. 349 Hernandez Rerum/p. 255 Hernandez Historia=Prosthechea
pastoris (Encyclia pastoris, Epidendrum pastoris)?
amaxtlatl=FC=Rumex mexicanus or Rumex sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
amazauhtli=p. 349 Hernandez Rerum=Orchidaceae?
amazquitl/amezquite=Ficus pertusa (F. arbutifolia, F. complicata, F. padifolia)
(Díaz 1976)
amocoztic=Ficus nymphaeifolia (Díaz 1976)
amohuitli=Hamelia patens (H. erecta) (Díaz 1976)
a-mo-kia=Panaeolus sphinctrinus (Díaz 1976)
amole/amolli=FC460b=Agave filifera or A. parryi or Agave lophantha (A. univittata, A. heteracantha) or Manfreda guttata (Agave guttata) or Phytolacca octandra or Polianthes tuberosa or Prochnyanthes mexicana (P. viridescens) or
Sapindus marginatus or Stegnosperma halimifolium (Díaz 1976 ; Estrada Lugo
1989) or Zephyranthes carinata (Díaz 1976) or Sapindus saponaria (Díaz 1976
; Estrada Lugo 1989)
amolquelite=Microsechium palmatum (M. helleri) or Phytolacca icosandra (Díaz 1976)
amolzochitl=Polianthes geminiflora (Bravoa geminiflora) (Díaz 1976)
amoxtle/amomotli/amoxtli=pl.61, 90 Badianus (C-B fol. 34r, 49v)=Nostoc commune (Godínez et al. 2001) or bryophyte (Guerra 1952)
amozotl (aquatic edible herb that sticks to the clothes non-sharp)=p. 349 Hernandez
Rerum/p. 362 Hernandez Historia=FC=Urtica dioica (Estrada Lugo 1987  in
Pico and Nuez 2000a)
anacahuite=Cordia boissieri or C. sebestena or C. tinifolia (Díaz 1976)
anchinol/anchinoli=Heimia salicifolia (Díaz 1976)
a-neg-la-kya= Datura wrightii (D. innoxia) (Díaz 1976)
a-ni=Panaeolus sphinctrinus (Díaz 1976)
anil=Indigofera suffruticosa (I. anil) (de Batres et al. 2012; Díaz 1976)
anpnas=FC=Annona muricata or A. reticulata (Estrada Lugo 1989)
anonyma=p. 351 Hernandez Rerum/p. 482 Hernandez Historia=Stevia sp.?
aocoxochitl=p. 353 Hernandez Rerum/p. 346 Hernandez Historia=Didymaea mexicana (Díaz 1976)
apanxaloa/apancholoa=p. 353 Hernandez Rerum/p. 35 Hernandez Historia=Cuphea
aequipetala (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010)
aparegua/aparequa=Discocnide mexicanum (Urticastrum mexicanum) (Díaz 1976)
aphatzi puntzumeti=Calea integrifolia (Díaz 1976)
apintli=Manfreda guttata (Agave guttata) (Altamirano 1896; Díaz 1976) or
Prochnyanthes mexicana (P. viridescens) (Díaz 1976)
apipiltzin=Psilocybe aztecorum (Díaz 1976)
apitzalpatli=p. 285 Hernandez Rerum/p. 4 Hernandez Historia=Malvastrum
coromandelianum?
apitzalpatli=p. 285 Hernandez Rerum/p. 6 Hernandez Historia=Flourensia thurifera (Helianthus thurifer) (Díaz 1976)
apitzalpatli=Ricinus communis (Comas et al. 1995)
apitzalatli tzontololotli=p. 199 Hernandez Rerum/p. 10 Hernandez
Historia=Perymenium rude (Díaz 1976) or Priva sp.?
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
245
apompo=Pachira aquatica (P. macrocarpa) (Díaz 1976)
aposmi/aposi=Erythrina flabelliformis (Díaz 1976)
apoyomatli=p. 33 Hernandez Rerum/p. 392 Hernandez Historia=Cyperus articulatus (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010)
aquahuitl/ā-cuahuitl (water tree)=pl. 39, 81, 83 Badianus (C-B fol. 24r, 45r,
46r)=Chilopsis linearis (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Astianthus viminalis (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz
1976; Reko 1947) or Tebebuia rosea (Linares and Bye 2013)
aqualachti=Cayaponia racemosa (Díaz 1976)
aquiche=Guazuma ulmifolia (G. tomentosa) (Díaz 1976)
aquillot=Philadelphus coulteri (Díaz 1976)
aquilotl/acuilotl=p. 107 Hernandez Rerum/p. 224 Hernandez Historia=Philadelphus
coulteri?
aquiztli=p. 354 Hernandez Rerum/p. 118 Hernandez Historia=FC=Paullinia fuscescens (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Anacardium sp. or Rhus sp. (Reko
1947)
araroba=Vataireopsis araroba (Andira araroba) (Díaz 1976)
atatapalacatl/atlacuezona/atzatzamolli=FC=Nymphaea mexicana (Estrada Lugo
1989; Zepeda and White 2008) or Nymphaea gracilis (Castalia gracilis) (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
atecioatl=p. 445 Hernandez Rerum/p. 68 Hernandez Historia=Chromolaena collina
(Eupatorium collinum) (Díaz 1976)
atecomatl=Crescentia alata (Díaz 1976)
atecuicixtli/atecuiyxtli/atecuiztle=Rhynchosia phaseoloides (Dolicholus phaseoloides) (Díaz 1976)
atehuapatli=p. 264 Hernandez Rerum/p. 66 Hernandez Historia=Pilea sp. or
Achimenes erecta (A. coccinea) (Díaz 1976)
ateje=Cordia bullata var. globosa (Díaz 1976)
atematzalquilitl=Lupinus elegans (Díaz 1976)
atempahtli=Haplophyton cimicicum (Díaz 1976)
atenxihuitl=p. 355 Hernandez Rerum/p. 70 Hernandez Historia=Ranunculus petiolaris (R. geoides) (Díaz 1976)
atepocapatli=p. 33-34 Hernandez Rerum/p. 154 Hernandez Historia=Lasianthaea
aurea (Zexmenia aurea) (Díaz 1976)
ates=Annona squamosa (Díaz 1976)
atka-t=Psilocybe cordispora or P. hoogshagenii (Díaz 1976)
atlacotl=FC648=Aster sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
atlancane/atlanchane/atlanchana=p. 264 Hernandez Rerum/p. 80 Hernandez
Historia=Lythrum maritimum or Cuphea lanceolata (Ocaranza 2011) or Cuphea
aequipetala or C. lanceolata or L. maritimum (Díaz 1976)
atlatlancuata=Iresine calea (Díaz 1976)
atlatzonpili/atlatzonpillin/atlatzompili=p. 117 Hernandez Rerum/p. 128 Hernandez
Historia=FC698=Malvaviscus aff. arboreus (Zepeda and White 2008) or M.
drummondii (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Hedeoma costata var. costata
(H. quinquenervata) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
246
atehuapatli=Achimenes erecta (A. coccinea) (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
atlepatli=FC454=Ranunculus hydrocharoides (R. stolonifer) (Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1989) or R. dichotomus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
atlinam/atlinan=p. 286 Hernandez Rerum/p. 83 Hernandez Historia=Rumex pulcher (Díaz 1976)
atochietl/ātōchietl (rabbit’s tobacco of damp places)=pl. 24 Badianus (C-B fol.
15v)=Poliomintha sp.? or Cunila lythrifolia (Bye and Linares 2013; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Clinopodium sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Lippia
alba (L. geminata) (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Hedeoma acinoides or H. piperita (Díaz 1976) or Hedeoma sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
atonahuitzpatli=Peperomia umbilicata (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010) or
Bouvardia erecta or Tripogandra disgrega (Tradescantia disgrega) (Díaz 1976)
atoyaxocotl/ā-tōyā-c-xocotl (river, apple or fruit)=pl. 10, 81 Badianus (C-B fol. 8v,
45r )=pl. 104 Badianus (C-B fol.56v)=FC418=Spondias purpurea (de Ávila
Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Miranda and
Valdés 1964; Reko 1947)
atuto=Vitex mollis or V. pyramidata (Díaz 1976)
atzacuhtli=Cranicis speciosa?
atzapotl/atztzapotl=FC414=Pouteria campechiana (Lucuma salicifolia) (Díaz
1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Casimiroa greggii (Sargentia greggii) or Sideroxylon
sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
atzatzamolli=FC447c,483=Nymphaea gracilis (Díaz 1976)
atzautli/atzauhtli=Cranichis speciosa (Díaz 1976; Ossenbach 2009)
atzauhtli acuatico=Cranichis tubularis (Díaz 1976)
atzcalxochitl=Sprekelia formosissima or Zephyranthes carinata (Díaz 1976)
atzitzicaztli/atzizicaztli/ā-tzītzicāztli (water nettle)=pl. 26 Badianus (C-B fol.
16v)=p. 356 Hernandez Rerum/p. 384 Hernandez Historia=Urtica chamaedryoides (U. chichiaztli) or U. urens or Urera caracasana (Bye and Linares 2013; de
Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
atzomiatl/atzoyatl=FC=Mirabilis jalapa (Estrada Lugo 1989; Ortiz de Montellano
1990) or Castilleja tenuiflora (C. canescens) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
atzoyatl=p. 170 Hernandez Rerum/p. 195,196 Hernandez Historia=Mirabilis jalapa
or Castilleja tenuiflora (C. canescens) (Díaz 1976)
auacatl/ahuacatl/auacaquauitl=FC=Persea americana (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989; Ortiz de Montellano 1975, 1990)
auaquauitl/ahuaquauitl=FC38=Quercus sp. (Ortiz de Montellano 1990; Standley
1920–1926:173)
auatetzmoili=FC382=Quercus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989; Standley 1920–1926:173)
auatl/āhuatl (oak)=pl. 70 Badianus (C-B fol. 39v)=Quercus sp. (de Ávila Blomberg
2012; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
aueuetl=FC379=Taxodium mucronatum (T. huegelii) (Díaz 1976)
avitle=Justicia spigera (Jacobinia mohintli) (Díaz 1976)
axicalli=Lagenaria siceraria (L. vulgaris) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
247
axin/axquauitl=FC=Spondias mombin (S. lutea) or S. purpurea or Spondias sp.
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
axixcozahuizpatli=p. 153 Hernandez Rerum/p. 475 Hernandez Historia=?
axixpatli=p. 355 Hernandez Rerum/p. 14 Hernandez Historia=Dalea lutea (Parosela
plumosa) or Persicaria punctata (Polygonum acre) or Persicaria hydropiper
(Polygonum hydropiper) or Verbena carolina or V. litoralis (Díaz 1976)
axixpatli coztic=Rumex mexicanus (Díaz 1976)
axixpatli texaxahuacense=p. 112 Hernandez Rerum/p. 18 Hernandez Historia=Vitis
tiliifolia (V. caribaea)?
axixquahuitl=Buddleja americana (Díaz 1976)
axixtlacotl=Baccharis salicina (B. glutinosa) or Salvia longispicata (Díaz 1976)
axochiatl=Lonicera pilosa or Oenothera laciniata (Díaz 1976)
axocopaque=Gaultheria acuminata or G. procumbens (Díaz 1976)
axocotl (water sour fruit)=pl. 70, 80, 104 Badianus (C-B fol. 39v, 44v, 56v)=Spondias
purpurea (Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947)
axoxoco/axocopac/axocopaconi (sour aquatic edible herb)=FC464b,623,624=Rumex
mexicanus (Estrada Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a; Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Gaultheria acuminata (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or R. pulcher subsp.
woodsii (R. brevipes) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
axoloquahuitl=Rhus terebinthifolia (Díaz 1976)
axquauitl/axin=FC=Jatropha curcas (Estrada Lugo 1989; Ortiz de Montellano
1990)
ayacachquahuitl=p. 357 Hernandez Rerum/p. 285 Hernandez Historia=Jatropha
peltata (J. platyphylla) or Crescentia alata (Díaz 1976)
ayacahuite/ayauhquahuitl/ayauhquauitl/aiauhquauitl/āyauh-cuahuitl (fog tree)=pl.
62, 70, 80, 91 Badianus (C-B fol. 35v, 39v, 44v, 50r)=FC376=Pinus ayacahuite
(de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Linares
and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al.
1992)
ayal/ayale=Crescentia alata (Díaz 1976)
ayanqueni=Helicteres baruensis (Díaz 1976)
ayauhtli (Ayauh, water goddess)=pl. 46 Badianus (C-B fol. 27v)=Pinus ayacahuite
(Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Cucurbita sp. (Guerra 1952)
ayauhton/ayauhtona/ayauhtonan=FC480b=Cuphea jorullensis (Díaz 1976 ) or
Porophyllum coloratum or Porophyllum tagetoides (Pico and Nuez 2000b)
ayauhtona/ayauhtonan[yxiuh] (our-mother-of-the-fog’s herb)=pl. 99 Badianus
(C-B fol. 54r)=FC=Ipomopsis pinnata (Linares and Bye 2013; Valdés Gutiérrez
et al. 1992) or Cuphea sp. (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Cuphea
jorullensis (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Porophyllum coloratum (P. seemannii)
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
ayauhxochitl=Verbena officinalis (Díaz 1976)
ayecocimatl/ayecohtli/ayacote/ayecotl/ayocotli/aiecotli (primary name)=pl. 50
Badianus (C-B fol. 29v)=Phaseolus coccineus (P. multiflorus) (Bye and Linares
2013; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952;
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
248
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992; Zepeda and
White 2008)
aylin (water ylin, tree)=pl. 70 Badianus (C-B fol. 39v)=Alnus sp.? (Guerra 1952;
Miranda and Valdés 1964)
ayohuactli=Jatropha curcas (Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
ayohuitztic=Solanum fontanesianum (Díaz 1976)
ayohuitztli=Celosia argentea (C. cristata) or Solanum angustifolium (S. cornutum)
(Díaz 1976)
ayohuiztle=Solanum angustifolium (S. cornutum) (Díaz 1976)
ayonelhuatl/ayoh-nelhuatl (squash root)=pl. 109 Badianus (C-V fol. 59r)=Cucurbita
sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko
1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Cucurbita pepo (Linares and Bye 2013)
ayoquilitl/ayoquiltic=Manihot foetida (Díaz 1976)
ayotectli=Cayaponia laciniosa (Bryonia variegata) or Cayaponia racemosa or
Manihot foetida (Díaz 1976)
ayotic=Euphorbia seguieriana (E. campestris) (Díaz 1976)
ayotli=Cucurbita sp. (Dressler 1953) or C. pepo (Díaz 1976)
ayoxochquilitl=FC464c=Cucurbita sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ayozotic=Cucurbita foetidissima (Díaz 1976)
aytzmitl (aquatic purslane)=FC=Ludwigia peploides (Estrada Lugo 1987  in Pico
and Nuez 2000a)
azazal=Cayaponia racemosa (Díaz 1976)
azcalxochitl=FC707=Sprekelia formosissima (Amaryllis formosissima) (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
azcapan yxhuatlahcolpahtli/āzcanpan ixhua tlahzolpahtli (rubbish-dump remedy
that comes up around anthills)=pl. 20, 76 Badianus (C-B fol. 13v, 42v)=Datura
stramonium (Bye and Linares 2013; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Guerra
1952; Reko 1947; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or D.
innoxia (D. meteloides) (Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
azcatzontecomatl=FC=Acalypha monostachya (A. hederacea) or Polygala alba
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
azote=Ipomoea murucoides (Díaz 1976)
azpan=FC=Epilobium mexicanum or Oenothera elata subsp. hookeri (O. hookeri)
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
azumiatl=Sambucus canadensis (S. mexicana) (Díaz 1976)
bledos=FC=Amaranthus hybridus or A. palmeri or Amaranthus cruentus (A. paniculatus) or A. spinosus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
çacacili=FC532=Lithospermum sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
çaçacichit/zacachichic=p. 198 Hernandez Rerum/p. 812 Hernandez Historia=Conyza
filaginoides
cacahoanantzin=Licania arborea (Díaz 1976)
cacahoaquahuitl/quauhpatlathli=p. 80 Hernandez Rerum/p. 991 Hernandez
Historia=Theobroma bicolor (Bye and Linares 1990) or T. cacao (Díaz 1976;
Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
cacahoatl=Arachis hypogaea (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
249
cacahuananche=Licania arborea or Gliricidia sepium (Díaz 1976)
cacahuate=Arachis hypogaea (Díaz 1976)
cacahuaxochitl=p. 226 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1063 Hernandez Historia=Quararibea
funebris (Alcántara Rojas 2008; Reko 1947; Wasson 1980)
cacalacaxochitl=Plumeria rubra (Díaz 1976)
cacaloxochitl/cācālō-xōchitl (crow flower)=pl. 70, 81, 97 Badianus (C-B fol. 39v,
45r, 53r)=FC692=Plumeria rubra (P. acutifolia, P. bicolor) (Alcántara Rojas
2008; Comas et al. 1995; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Ortiz de
Montellano 1990; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992; Zepeda and White
2008) or Plumeria alba (Díaz 1976) or Crotalaria cajanifolia (C. eriocarpa)
(Estrada Lugo 1989) or Tigridia pavonia (Estrada Lugo 1989)
cacamaxochitl/cacauaxochitl=FC684=Quararibea funebris (Lexarza funebris)
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
cacamilxochitl=p. 358 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1061 Hernandez
Historia=Ranunculaceae?
cacamotic=FC=Ipomoea purga (Díaz 1976; Ortiz de Montellano 1990) or I. jalapa
(Díaz 1976) or I. batatas or I. mexicana or I. schaffneri or Merremia quinquefolia (I. quinquefolia) or Turbina corymbosa (Ipomoea sidaefolia) (Estrada Lugo
1989)
cacamotic tlanoquiloni=p. 299 Hernandez Rerum/p. 528 Hernandez
Historia=Ipomoea jalapa?
çacanochopalli=FC=Opuntia megarhiza?
çacanoualli/cacanoualli/zaxanoualli=FC=Andropogon sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
cacaoatl=Theobroma cacao? (Ocaranza 2011)
çaçapipilol xochitl/zacapillolxochitl=p. 120 Hernandez Rerum/p. 824 Hernandez
Historia=Lonicera pilosa?
çacatetztli=FC637=Panicum sp.?
cacatlaxcalli=FC=Cuscuta americana or C. odontolepis or C. tinctoria (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
cacatlaolxochitl/zacatlaolxochitl=p. 359 Hernandez Rerum/p. 818 Hernandez
Historia=FC=Cassytha filiformis (Estrada Lugo 1989)
cacaoaquauitl/cacahoatl=FC=Theobroma cacao (Estrada Lugo 1989; Standley
1920–1926:805; Zepeda and White 2008) or T. angustifolium or T. bicolor
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
cacapatli/zacapatli=p. 359 Hernandez Rerum/p. 814 Hernandez
Historia=Menyanthes trifoliata?
çacateztli/cacateteztli=FC447a, 484=Panicum sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
cacaua quahuitl/cacahoaquahuitl (cacao)=p. 79 Hernandez Rerum/p. 909
Hernandez Historia=Theobroma cacao (Bye and Linares 1990)
cacauaxochitl/cacahuaxōchitl (cacao flower)=pl. 65, 97, 98 Badianus (C-B fol. 37r,
53r, 53v)=Quararibea funebris (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Linares
and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Schultes 1957; Valdés Gutiérrez et al.
1992)
çacauitzpatli/zacahuitzpatli=p. 198 Hernandez Rerum/p. 820 Hernandez Historia=?
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
250
cachruiaqua/cahriuaca=p. 359 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1013 Hernandez Historia=?
cacomitl=FC=Tigridia pavonia or Tigridia sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
cacxomitl/cacomite=Tigridia pavonia (Dressler 1953; Zepeda and White 2008)
calabazas=FC=Cucurbita foetidissima or C. argyrosperma (C. mixta) or C. moschata or C. pepo (Estrada Lugo 1989)
calancapacle/calancapatle=Packera bellidifolia (Senecio vulneraria) (Díaz 1976)
caltoli/caltolli=FC639a=Cyperus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Schoenoplectus sp.?
camopahtli=Echeandia flavescens (Anthericum leptophyllum) (Díaz 1976)
camopaltic=Stevia jorullensis (S. clinopodia) (Díaz 1976)
camatotoncapatli=p. 360 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1020 Hernandez Historia=?
camolxochitl/chamolxochitl=p. 361 Hernandez Rerum/p. 926 Hernandez
Historia=Caesalpinia pulcherrima
camopaltic=p. 360 Hernandez Rerum/p. 845 Hernandez Historia=Stevia jorullensis
(S. clinopodia)?
camotli=FC441=Ipomoea batatas (Convolvulus batatas) (Dressler 1953; Estrada
Lugo 1989; Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Dioscorea sp. (Farfán and Elferink
2010)
canas=FC=Bambusa sp. or Saccharum officinarum (Estrada Lugo 1989)
capollaxipehualli (barkless cherry tree)=pl. 78 Badianus (C-B fol. 43v)=Prunus
serotina (P. serotina subsp. capuli) (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Chrysobalanus
icaco (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
capulxihuitl/capulin/capoli/capolin (capulin plant, cherry tree)=pl. 53 Badianus
(C-B fol. 31r)=FC425=p. 238 Sahagún=p. 95 Hernandez Rerum/p. 902
Hernandez Historia=Prunus serotina ((P. capollin, P. serotina subsp. capuli)
(Comas et al. 1995; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Ocaranza 2011; Ortiz de
Montellano 1990) or Conostegia sp.? Rhamnus sp.? (Reko 1947)
catzotl=Pachyrhizus erosus (P. angulatus) (Díaz 1976)
caxtlatlapan=FC674=Ipomoea jalapa or Ipomoea sp. or Merremia tuberosa
(Ipomoea tuberosa) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
cayolizcan/zayolizcan/çayolitizcan=p. 66 Hernandez Rerum/p. 848 Hernandez
Historia=FC=Buddleja americana (Díaz 1976; Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
ceçentlahcol (half by half/half apiece)=pl. 67 Badianus (C-B fol. 38r)=Echeveria
sp. (Linares and Bye 2013; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Vernonia sp. (Guerra
1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947)
celicpatli/cecicpatlil pahuatlanense/cececpatli/cecepatli=p. 363 Hernandez
Rerum/p. 859 Hernandez Historia=Herpestis sp.? or Iresine calea (Farfán and
Elferink 2010)
cempoalxochitl/cempualçuchil=p. 154 Hernandez Rerum/p. 645,646 Hernandez
Historia=FC677b=Tagetes erecta or T. patula (Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo
1989) or T. erecta (Comas et al. 1995; Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010;
Ocaranza 2011; Ortiz de Montellano 1990; Zepeda and White 2008) or Tagetes
tenuifolia (T. peduncularis) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
cenanam de quahuana hoac=p. 361 Hernandez Rerum=Lantana camara?
cenanan tetzcoquensi/cenanan tetzcoquense=p. 185 Hernandez Rerum/p. 740
Hernandez Historia=Asclepias lanuginosa?
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
251
centli/cintli=Zea mays (Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo 1989)
centzonxochitl/cen-tzon-xōchitl (400 flowers)=pl. 74, 75, 79, 80, 108 Badianus (C-B
fol. 41v, 42r, 44r, 44v, 58v)=Galium sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Miranda and
Valdés 1964) or Galium trifidum (Linares and Bye 2013; Valdés Gutiérrez et al.
1992) or Phlox sp.? (Guerra 1952)
ceoalchichiltic=Vitis tiliifolia (Díaz 1976)
chalcaloxochil/chacalxochitl/chacamalxochitl/chachalxochitl=Caesalpinia pulcherrima (Díaz 1976)
chachalacametl=p. 361 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1057 Hernandez Historia=Citharexylum
affine (Díaz 1976)
chalcuitlatl=Alternanthera sessilis (A. repens) or Lythrum alatum (Díaz 1976)
chamolxochitl=Caesalpinia pulcherrima or Conyza filaginoides (Díaz 1976)
chapolxiuitl/chapolxihuitl=FC525=Euphorbia bracteata (Pedilanthus pavonis)
(Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Euphorbia tithymaloides (P. tithymaloides)
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
chapolycxitl=Dodonaea viscosa (Díaz 1976)
charapetl=p. 363 Hernandez Rerum=?
chapulizctli/chapuliztle=Dodonaea viscosa (Díaz 1976)
chatalhuich=p. 70 Hernandez Rerum=Senna septemtrionalis (Cassia laevigata) (de
Batres et al. 2012)
chayotectli/chayotestle=Sechium edule (Díaz 1976)
chayotli=Sechium edule (Dressler 1953)
chia/chian=pl. 59 Badianus (C-B fol. 34r)=FC=Hyptis sp. (de Ávila Blomberg
2012) or Salvia sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Salvia hispanica (Dressler
1953; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Ocaranza 2011) or Mesosphaerum suaveolens (Hyptis suaveolens) or S. polystachya (Estrada Lugo 1989)
chiantzotzoltic/chiantzozolli/chiantzotzotl=FC=p. 234 Hernandez Rerum/p. 208
Hernandez Historia=Salvia hispanica (Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo
1989; Reko 1947)
chiantzozolli=p. 234 Hernandez Rerum/p. 209 Hernandez Historia=Nama
pringlei?
chicallotl/chicalotl=p. 215 Hernandez Rerum/p. 804 Henandez
Historia=FC=Argemone grandiflora or A. mexicana or A. ochroleuca (Estrada
Lugo 1989; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Ocaranza 2011)
chichiantic=p. 227 Hernandez Rerum/p. 218 Hernandez Historia=Lantana
hirsuta?
chichicahoaztic/chichicahoazton=p. 143 Hernandez Rerum/p. 352 Hernandez
Historia=Eryngium carlinae? (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010)
chichicallotl=Argemone mexicana (Díaz 1976)
chichicamole/chichicamule=Cucurbita radicans or Microsechium palmatum (M.
guatemalense, M. helleri) (Díaz 1976)
chichicamotic=Ipomoea hederifolia (Díaz 1976)
chichicaquilitl/ocoquilitl (bitter aquatic edible herb)=p. 364 Hernandez Rerum/p.
356 Hernandez Historia=FC472c=Sonchus oleraceus (Estrada Lugo 1989;
Farfán and Elferink 2010; Ocaranza 2011) or Mimulus glabratus (Díaz 1976;
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
252
Estrada Lugo 1987  in Pico and Nuez 2000a) or Launaea intybacea (Lactuca
intybacea) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Mimulus luteus (Estrada Lugo
1989)
chichicaste=Mikania scandens (Díaz 1976)
chichicastli/chichicastle/tsitsikaxtli=Urtica chamaedryoides (U. chichicaztli) or U.
urens or Urera caracasana (Díaz 1976)
chichicayotl=Cayaponia laciniosa (Bryonia variegata)? (Ocaranza 2011)
chichicayotli=Cayaponia racemosa or Cucurbita foetidissima (Díaz 1976)
chichicaztle=Lemna minor or Urera caracasana or Wigandia urens (W. caracasana)
(Díaz 1976)
chichic patli=FC613=Bulnesia arborea (Guaiacum arboreum) (Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1989) or Cephalanthus occidentalis or Hintonia latiflora (Coutarea latiflora) or Mandevilla tubiflora (Echites tubiflorus) (Díaz 1976)
chichicquauitl/chichicquahuitl=FC=Hintonia latiflora (Díaz 1976) or Cornus florida var. urbiniana (C. urbiniana) (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Garrya laurifolia (Díaz
1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or G. laurifolia (G. oblonga) or G. laurifolia Benth.
subsp. racemosa (G. racemosa) (Estrada Lugo 1989) or or Bulnesia arborea
(Guaiacum arboreum) (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Garrya ovata Benth.?
chichictexcalamatl/chichīc texcalāmatl/texcalamatlchichic (bitter paper-tree of the
boulders)=pl. 78 Badianus (C-B fol. 43v)=Ficus petiolaris (de Ávila Blomberg
2012; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or F. cotinifolia
(Linares and Bye 2013) or Ficus sp. (Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
chichictzompontonic=Pseudognaphalium conoideum (Gnaphalium conoideum)
(Díaz 1976)
chichicuahuitl=Garrya laurifolia or G. ovata or Penstemon campanulatus (Díaz
1976)
chichicxihuitl (bitter plant or herb)=pl. 55 Badianus (C-B fol. 32r)=Arracacia sp.
(Reko 1947) or Calea zacatechichi (Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or
Dalea sp. or Arracacia sp. (Guerra 1952)
chichientic=FC535=Salvia sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
chichihualxochitl=FC694=Carica papaya (Ortiz de Montellano 1975, 1990)
chichillotl=Argemone mexicana (Díaz 1976)
chichilquiltic=FC543=Amaranthus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
chichiltic cihuapatli=p. 367 Hernandez Rerum/p. 887 Hernandez Historia=?
chichilticpatli=p. 366 Hernandez Rerum/p. 995 Hernandez Historia=?
chichiltic tepetlauhxochitl=p. 368 Hernandez Rerum=Laelia autumnalis or
Stanhopea tigrina (Ossenbach 2009)
chichiltictepetzacuxochitl=Laelia autumnalis or Laelia speciosa (Berdan 2007)
chichimecapatli=p. 138 Hernandez Rerum/p. 924 Hernandez Historia=Euphorbia
radians (Díaz 1976 )
chichimecatl/chichimecapatli=Macroptilium gibbosifolium (Phaseolus heterophyllus) (Díaz 1976)
chichipeloti=Zea mays (Rivera Morales 1941)
chichioalxochitl/chichiualxochitl=p. 365 Hernandez Rerum/p. 564 Hernandez
Historia=Carica papaya (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
253
chichioaquahuitl/chichiualquauitl=FC=Jatropha cardiophylla (Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1989)
chichipiltic=FC=Asclepias tuberosa or Astragalus crassicarpus (Estrada Lugo
1989)
chichiquahuitl=Cornus florida var. urbiniana (C. urbiniana) or Garrya laurifolia
(Díaz 1976)
chichiquilitl=Solanum americanum (S. nigrum) (Díaz 1976)
chichiual memeya/chichioalmemeya=p. 172 Hernandez Rerum/p. 964 Hernandez
Historia=?
chicomacatl (seven reeds)=pl. 80 Badianus (C-B fol. 44v)=Struthanthus interruptus
(S. venetus)? (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Psittacanthus calyculatus (Díaz 1976;
Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Tillandsia prodigiosa (Linares and Bye 2013;
Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Ficus sp.?
chicozapotl=Manilkara zapota (Achras sapota) or Casimiroa edulis (Díaz 1976)
chictecitl=FC=Capsicum annuum var. glabriusculum or C. frutescens?
chietla=Ficus nymphaeifolia (Díaz 1976)
chilamacatl=FC=Helianthus annuus (Ortiz de Montellano 1975)
chile=FC=Capsicum annuum (Estrada Lugo 1989)
chiikan=Mucuna pruriens (Díaz 1976)
chilacalote=Bocconia arborea (Díaz 1976)
chilacastle=Lemna minor (Díaz 1976)
chilacayote=Melothria pendula (M. guadalupensis) (Díaz 1976)
chilcuague=Erigeron affinis or Heliopsis longipes (Díaz 1976)
chilacole=Erythrina coralloides (Díaz 1976)
chilicote=Erythrina flabelliformis (Díaz 1976)
chillapatli=p. 102 Hernandez Rerum/p. 425 Hernandez Historia=Tilia sp.
chillazotl=Argemone mexicana (Díaz 1976; Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
chilli=p. 135, 136, 137 Hernandez Rerum/p. 430, 431, 433, 434 Hernandez
Historia=Capsicum annuum (Farfán and Elferink 2010; Ocaranza 2011)
chilli Indie Orientalis=p. 169 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1071 Hernandez
Historia=Zingiber officinale?
chilmecatl=Erigeron affinis or Heliopsis longipes (Díaz 1976)
chilochuchi=Pseudobombax ellipticum (Bombax ellipticum) (Díaz 1976)
chilpan=p. 202 Hernandez Rerum/p. 831 Hernandez Historia=FC678e=Penstemon
campanulatus (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
chilpanoxochitl=Lobelia laxiflora (Díaz 1976)
chilpantlacotl=Penstemon barbatus (Díaz 1976)
chilpantlaçolli/chilpantlazolli=p. 140 Hernandez Rerum/p. 738 Hernandez
Historia=Lobelia laxiflora (Díaz 1976)
chilpanton=FC542=Lobelia laxiflora (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Farfán and
Elferink 2010; Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
chilpanxochitl=p. 210 Hernandez Rerum/p. 829 Hernandez Historia=Lobelia laxiflora (Díaz 1976) or Penstemon barbatus?
chilpatli=p. 139 Hernandez Rerum/p. 423 Hernandez Historia=Croton cortesianus
(Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
254
chiltepin/chiltecpin/chiltecpitl=FC=Capsicum frutescens (C. minimum) or C. baccatum (C. microcarpum) (Estrada Lugo 1989) or C. annuum var.
glabriusculum?
chimalacatl/chimalacaxochitl=FC757b=p. 101, 102 Hernandez Historia=Helianthus
annuus (Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo 1989; Lentz et al. 2008a, b;
Ortiz de Montellano 1990) or Verbesina crocata (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
chimalatl peruina=p. 228 Hernandez Rerum=Helianthus annuus (Díaz 1976;
Dressler 1953; Zepeda and White 2008)
chimalxochitl=Helianthus annuus (Zepeda and White 2008)
china michuacanensi/china mechoacanense=p. 213 Hernandez Rerum/p. 769
Hernandez Historia=Smilax sp.?
chinchayote=Sechium edule (Díaz 1976)
chintul=Sprekelia formosissima (Díaz 1976)
chipaoacyztic=Iostephane heterophylla (Díaz 1976)
chiople=Critonia hemipteropoda (Eupatorium hemipteropodum) (Díaz 1976)
chipa(h)uacxihuitl (clean/light colored herb)=pl. 8 Badianus (C-B fol. 7v)=Dioscorea
sp.? Smilax sp.? (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Dioscorea galeottiana (Bye and
Linares 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or D. convolvulacea (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
chipequa=p. 203 Hernandez Rerum/p. 898 Hernandez Historia=?
chipilli=FC=Crotalaria sp. or Crotalaria pumila (Estrada Lugo 1989)
chiyauaxihuitl (greasy herb)=pl. 100 Badianus (C-B fol. 54v)=Mirabilis sp. (Linares
and Bye 2013; Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Tagetes sp.? (Reko 1947) or
Tagetes sp. (Guerra 1952)
chochoyatl=Roldana ehrenbergiana (Senecio canicidus) (Díaz 1976)
chocolin=Erythrina coralloides or E. mexicana (Díaz 1976)
cholagogue=Colubrina triflora (C. guatemalensis) (Díaz 1976)
chucunguariqua=p. 368 Hernandez Rerum/p. 501 Hernandez Historia=Dyschoriste
sp.?
chupire/chupireni=Euphorbia calyculata (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
cicimatic/cimatl=p. 265 Hernandez Rerum/p. 203 Hernandez
Historia=FC608=Canavalia villosa (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Ramirezella strobilophora (Ochoterena-Booth 2000)
cihoapaltli=Montanoa tomentosa (Díaz 1976)
cihoapatli tepoztemica/cihuapatli tepoztlanico=p. 370 Hernandez Rerum/p. 892
Hernandez Historia=Lamiaceae?
cihoapatli xantetelco/cihuapatli xantelecense=p. 370 Hernandez Rerum/p. 893
Hernandez Historia=Pluchea salicifolia (P. adnata)?
ci(h)uapahtli/cihnapahtli/cihuapatli/chihuā-pahtli (women’s remedy)=pl. 106
Badianus (C-B fol. 57v)=FC=Montanoa tomentosa (Eriocoma floribunda) (de
Ávila Blomberg 2012; del Pozo 1966; Estrada Lugo 1989; Farfán and Elferink
2010; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Ortiz de
Montellano 1975; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
cihuacoanenepilli=Passiflora suberosa (Díaz 1976)
cihuapastle=Chromolaena odorata (Eupatorum odoratum) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
255
cihuapatli=Alomia alata (Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Bouvardia bouvardioides
(Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Chromolaena odorata (Eupatorium odratum)
(Díaz 1976) or Hamelia calycosa (Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Montanoa
tomentosa (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Montanoa floribunda or Pluchea
odorata or Tibouchina longifolia (T. bougaeana) or Vernonanthura deppeana
(Vernonia deppeana) (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
cihuapatli yacapichtlensi/cihuapatli yacapictlense=p. 157 Hernandez Rerum/p.
889 Hernandez Historia=Baccharis sp. or Stevia sp.?
cimapatli=p. 371 Hernandez Rerum/p. 981 Hernandez Historia=?
cimatl (primary name)=pl. 89 Badianus (C-B fol. 49r)=FC443, 460a=p. 265
Hernandez Rerum/p. 202 Hernandez Historia=Phaseolus coccineus (P. multiflorus) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or Desmodium amplifolium (Díaz 1976;
Estrada Lugo 1989) or D. orbiculare or D. parviflorum (Díaz 1976) or Phaseolus
sp. (Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Canavalia villosa or D. scoparium or
Macroptilium atropurpureum (Phaseolus atropurpureus) or Cochliasanthus caracalla (Phaseolus caracalla) or Phaseolus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
cimatl chico=Desmodium orbiculare (Díaz 1976)
cimiapactli=Montanoa floribunda (Díaz 1976)
cintul=Sprekelia formosissima or Anticlea frigida (Stenanthium frigidum, Veratrum
frigidum) (Díaz 1976)
cioapatli=Erigeron glacialis (E. scaposus) (Díaz 1976)
cirial=Crescentia alata (Díaz 1976)
cirian=Crescentia alata or C. cujete (Díaz 1976)
citzicastli/tzitzicastli/atzitsicaztli=Urera caracasana or Urtica chichiaztli or
Gronovia scandens (Comas et al. 1995)
ciuapatli=FC598=Montanoa tomentosa (Díaz 1976; Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
ciuipatli/cihuapatli=p. 187 Hernandez Rerum/p. 880 Hernandez Historia=
Lamiaceae?
ciuipatli/cihuapatli=p. 186 Hernandez Rerum/p. 882 Hernandez Historia=?
ciuipatli/cihuapatli=p. 186 Hernandez Rerum/p. 884 Hernandez Historia=?
coacamachalli=Pithecellobium dulce (Díaz 1976)
coaçihuizpatli/coacihuitzpatli=p. 188 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1068 Hernandez
Historia=Chromolaena odorata (Eupatorium odoratum) or Mollugo verticillata
(Díaz 1976)
coaciuizpatli/cohacihuizpatli=p. 301 Hernandez Rerum/p. 953 Hernandez
Historia=Tetranema roseum (T. mexicanum)?
coahuilxochitl/coahoitzxochitl=p. 371 Hernandez Rerum/p. 607 Hernandez
Historia=Lantana camara (Díaz 1976)
coalxoxouhqui=FC=Ipomoea jalapa or I. rosea or Turbina corymbosa (Ipomoea
sidaefolia) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
coamecaxochitl=Disocactus flagelliformis (Aporocactus flagelliformis) (Díaz 1976)
coamichin=Ficus congesta (F. fasciculata) or Ficus pertusa (F. arbutifolia, F.
complicata, F. padifolia) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
256
coanenepilli/cohuanenepolli/cuanenepilli=FC522=p. 300–302 Hernandez
Rerum=Passiflora jorullensis (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Ortiz de Montellano
1975, 1990) or P. aff. sicyoides (Zepeda and White 2008) or P. suberosa (Díaz
1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
coanepilli de codorniz=Physalis nicandroides (Díaz 1976)
coapatli=p. 28 Hernandez Rerum/p. 591 Hernandez Historia=Commelina tuberosa?
(Ocaranza 2011) or Campyloneurum phyllitidis or Euphorbia prostrata or Lippia
umbellata or Acourtia cordata (Perezia hebeclada) or Niphidium crassifolium
(Pleopeltis crassifolia, Polypodium crassifolium) (Díaz 1976)
coapatli asphodelino=p. 300 Hernandez Rerum/p. 597 Hernandez
Historia=Tradescantia crassifolia (Díaz 1976)
coapatlis de tepequaquilco=p. 29 Hernandez Rerum=Asteraceae?
coapatli quauhnacensi/coapatli quauhnahuacense=p. 36 Hernandez Rerum/p. 593
Hernandez Historia=Asteraceae
coapatlis teoitztle/copatli teoiszla=p. 29 Hernandez Rerum/p. 595 Hernandez
Historia=?
coaquiltic=Rhodosciadium tuberosum (Deanea tuberosa) (Díaz 1976)
coate=Eysenhardtia polystachya (Díaz 1976)
coatl=Caesalpinia bonduc (C. bonducella) (Díaz 1976)
coaztli=Eysenhardtia polystachya (Díaz 1976)
coatl xoxouhqui=FC449=Turbina corymbosa (Rivea corymbosa) (Díaz 1976;
Estrada Lugo 1989) or Datura ceratocaula or D. meteloides (Estrada Lugo 1989)
coatlycedal=Adiantum capillus-veneris (Díaz 1976)
coatzontecomatl=Matelea reticulata (Gonolobus reticulatus) or Stanhopea tigrina
(Díaz 1976)
coatzontecoxochitl/coatzontecomaxochitl/coatzontecomaxochitl=p. 266 Hernandez
Rerum/p. 379 Hernandez Historia=FC719=Stanhopea oculata (Safford 1912;
Zepeda and White 2008) or Stanhopea hernandezii or Stanhopea tigrina (Berdan
2007; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Ossenbach 2009)
coaxihuitl/cuaxihuitl=FC=p.267 Hernandez Rerum/p. 600 Hernandez
Historia=Lythrum alatum (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or L. vulneraria or
Turbina corymbosa (Ipomoea burmanni) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
coçatli coztic/cozatlicoztic=p. 156 Hernandez Rerum/p. 651 Hernandes
Historia=Tagetes patula?
cochitzapotl=FC=Casimiroa edulis (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
cochiztzapotl (sleep zapote/white zapote)=FC412=Casimiroa edulis (del Pozo
1966) (Ortiz de Montellano 1975, 1990; Zepeda and White 2008) or Couepia
polyandra (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
cochizxihuitl (sleep herb)=pl. 20 Badianus (C-B fol. 13v)=Russelia polyedra
(Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Bocconia integrifolia (Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952;
Reko 1947; Viesca and Aranda 1996) or Mentzelia hispida (Bye and Linares
2013) or Bocconia sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
cococaquilitl (hot aquatic quelite)=p. 171 Hernandez Rerum/p. 621 Hernandez
Historia=Agrimonia sp. or Adenophyllum glandulosum (A. coccineum) (Díaz
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
257
1976; Pico and Nuez 2000b) or Vigethia mexicana (Wyethia mexicana) (Díaz
1976)
cococaton=Stellaria nemorum (Díaz 1976)
cococcuahuitl=Croton gossypiifolius (C. sanguifluius)? (Comas et  al. 1995) or
Pterocarpus? Or Jatropha dioica (J. spatulata)?
cocochiatl=Mimosa sensitiva (Díaz 1976)
cocochihuitl=Bocconia arborea (Díaz 1976)
cococ patli/cococpatli=FC=Bocconia frutescens (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
or Tecoma stans (Estrada Lugo 1989)
cocoxihuitl=FC=Bocconia arborea (Estrada Lugo 1989) or B. frutescens or
Momordica charantia (Díaz 1976)
cocoxihuitl ocimono=Phyla scaberrima (Lippia dulcis) (Díaz 1976)
cocomecaxihuitl=Smilax rotundifolia? (Ocaranza 2011)
cocotemecatl/cococtemecatl=p. 141 Hernandez Rerum/p. 622 Hernandez
Historia=Asteraceae
cococ xihuitl (stinging herb)=pl. 52 Badianus (C-B fol. 30v)=p. 158 Hernandez
Rerum/p. 609 Hernandez Historia=p. 102 Sahagún=FC536=Bocconia frutescens
(Farfán and Elferink 2010; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Ortiz de Montellano 1975,
1990; Reko 1947) or B. arborea (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
cocolmeca=Smilax cordifolia or S. spinosa (S.mexicana) or S. pseudochina (Díaz
1976)
cocolmecan=Smilax spinosa (S. mexicana) (Díaz 1976)
cocopi=FC=Zea mexicana (Euchlaena mexicaqna) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
cocoxihuitl=Bocconia arborea (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010) or B. frutescens (Díaz 1976)
cocoxihuitl expurgatoria/cococxihuitl purgante=p. 142 Hernandez Rerum/p. 615
Hernandez Historia=Croton sp.?
cococxihuitl teuhcaltzincensi/cococxihuitl/ teuhcaltzincene/coco-c xihutl (stinging
herb)=pl. 52 Badianus (C-B fol. 30v)=p. 142 Hernandez Rerum/p. 612 Hernandez
Historia=FC=Bocconia sp.? (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or B. frutescens (Estrada
Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952) or B. integrifolia (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Verbenaceae
cocoxochitl (cane flower/hollow-stem flower)=p. 371 Hernandez Rerum=Dahlia sp.
(Sorensen 1970)
çoçoyatic=FC519=Anticlea frigida (Stenanthium frigidum)? or Zygadenus sp.? or
Schoenocaulon sp.?
cocoyol=Acrocomia aculeata (A. mexicana) (Díaz 1976)
cocoztamatl/cocoztamal=p. 118 Hernandez Rerum/p. 641 Hernandez Historia=?
cocoztic=Thalictrum hernandezii (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
cocoz xochipatli/cocozxuchipatli=p. 188 Hernandez Rerum/p. 989 Hernandez
Historia=Asteraceae?
cocuite=Piscidia piscipula (Díaz 1976)
coen/coentic=p. 252 Hernandez Rerum/p. 745 Hernandez Historia=Pachyrhizus
erosus (P. palmatilobus) (Díaz 1976)
coentli=Cosmos diversifolius (Díaz 1976)
cohacihuizpatli=Tetranema roseum (T. mexicanum) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
258
cohayelli=Eryngium carlinae (Díaz 1976)
cohuatli/coatli=pl. 34 Badianus (C-B. fol. 20v)=FC501=Eysenhardtia polystachya
(Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Ocaranza 2011; Ortiz de Montellano 1990; Reko 1947) or Jatropha dioica (J.
spathulata) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
coilotapalo=Cecropia obtusifolia (C. mexicana) (Díaz 1976)
collotemecatl/colotemecatl (trailing stone cord)=pl. 77 Badianus (C-B fol. 43r)=p.
373 Hernandez Rerum/p. 755 Hernandez Historia=Ipomoea sp.? (Reko 1947) or
Operculina sp. (Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
coloc=Psidium guajava (Díaz 1976)
colomecatl (scorpion/curved vine)=pl. 77 Badianus (C-B fol. 43r)=Ipomoea sp.
(Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013) or Operculina sp.?
colorin=Erythrina americana or E. coralloides or E. mexicana (Díaz 1976)
colorin de peces=Piscidia piscipula (Díaz 1976)
colotzitzicaztli/cōlō-tzītzicāztli (scorpion/curved nettle)=pl. 85 Badianus (C-B fol.
47r)=p. 373 Hernandez Rerum/p. 386 Hernandez Historia=FC=Cnidoscolus sp.
(de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Mentzelia sp. (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or
Cnidoscolus urens (Jatropha urens) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Jatropa
sp. (Comas et al. 1995; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Gronovia scandens or Mentzelia
lobata or Urera sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
coltotzin (little coltotl)=pl. 113 Badianus (C-B fol. 61r)=Dalea exserta (D. lagopus)
(Díaz 1976; Reko 1947) or D. leporina (Linares and Bye 2013) or Dalea sp.
(Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Marina nutans
(Dalea nutans) (Guerra 1952)
comalquilitl=Artemisia ludoviciana subsp. redolens (A. redolens) (Díaz 1976)
copal=FC=Bursera sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Bursera bipinnata (Elaphrium
bipinnatum) or Heliocarpus americanus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
copalche=Croton niveus (Díaz 1976)
copalchi=Hintonia latiflora (Coutarea latiflora) or Croton guatemalensis or Croton
niveus (Díaz 1976)
copalchi blanco=Croton niveus (Díaz 1976)
copalchi de jojutla=Hintonia latiflora (Coutarea latiflora) (Díaz 1976)
copalchi de Michoacan=Exostema caribaeum (Díaz 1976)
copalchi delgado=Croton niveus (Díaz 1976)
copalchichic=Croton niveus (Díaz 1976)
copalcocote/copalcoxocotl=Cyrtocarpa procera (Díaz 1976)
copalcuajiote=Bursera multijuga (Díaz 1976)
copali=Cyrtocarpa procera (Díaz 1976)
copaliyac xiuhtontli/copal-ihyā-c xiuh-tōntli (insignificant little herb that stinks like
copal)=pl. 52, 55 Badianus (C-B fol. 30v, 32r)=Tagetes sp. (de Ávila Blomberg
2012; Guerra 1952; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Dyssodia papposa (Bye and
Linares 2013a)
copaljiote=Pseudosmodingium perniciosum (Díaz 1976)
copaljocote=Cyurtocarpa procera (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
259
copalli=FC=Bursera copallifera (B. jorullensis) or Bursera lancifolia (B. trijuga)
(Díaz 1976) or Bursera sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Bursera bipinnata (Elaphrium
bipinnatum) or Heliocarpus americanus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
copalli quahuitl/copalquahuitl=p. 45 Hernandez Rerum/p. 531 Hernandez
Historia=FC=Bursera glabrifolia (Elaphrium aloexylon) or Bursera copallifera
(B. jorullensis) (Díaz 1976) or Bursera bipinnata (Elaphrium bipinnatum) or
Heliocarpus americanus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
copalquahuitl patlahoac=Bursera ariensis (B. sessiliflora) or Bursera copallifera
(B. jorullensis) (Díaz 1976)
copalquahuitlpatlahoac (copal tree)=p. 10 Badianus (C-B. fol. 8v)=p. 46 Hernandez
Rerum/p. 533 Hernandez Historia=FC=Bursera copallifera (B. jorullensis,
Elaphrium jorullense) (Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Reko 1947) or Bursera sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
copalli quauhxiotl/copalquauhxiotl=p. 47 Hernandez Rerum/p. 547 Hernandez
Historia=Bursera microphylla (Elaphrium microphyllum) or Bursera multijuga
(Díaz 1976)
copalquin=Croton eluteria (C. cascarilla) (Díaz 1976)
copalxihuitl=p. 103 Hernandez Rerum/p. 543 Hernandez Historia=Salvia formosa
(Díaz 1976)
copalxiu=Melampodium divaricatum (Díaz 1976)
copalxocotl/copal-xocotl (copal tart-fruit)=pl. 104 Badianus (C-B fol. 56v)=p. 82
Hernandez Rerum/p. 541 Hernandez Historia=Cyrtocarpa edulis or C. procera
(de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
copalyhyac=Protium heptaphyllum (Díaz 1976)
corpionchi=Galphimia glauca (Díaz 1976)
costiczapotl=Pouteria campechiana (Dressler 1953)
costomate/costomatl=Physalis coztomatl (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Solanum lycopsericum (Díaz 1976)
çotolin=FC=Dioon edule?
cotzotl=Pachyrhizus erosus (P. angulatus) (Díaz 1976)
couanenepilli/cohuanenepilli/cōānenepīlli (serpent tongue)=pl. 59, 80 Badianus
(C-B fol. 34r, 44v)=Dahlia coccinea (Linares and Bye 2013; Valdés Gutiérrez
et  al. 1992) or Passiflora jorullensis (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952;
Reko 1947) or Boerhavia coccinea (B. caribaea) or Potentilla candicans
(Miranda and Valdés 1964)
couaxocotl/cōāxocotl (snake tart-fruit)=pl. 68, 70 Badianus (C-B fol. 38v,
39v)=Physalis sp.? (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Rauvolfia tetraphyllla (R. heterophylla) (Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Crataegus sp.? (Guerra 1952;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or Manilkara zapota (Calocarpum mammosum) (Guerra 1952)
çoyatl=FC=Brahea dulcis?
coyol=Acrocomia aculeata (A. mexicana) (Díaz 1976)
coyolli=p. 71 Hernandez Rerum/p. 511 Hernandez Historia=?
coyoltomatl=FC486=Cayratia japonica (Vitis mollis) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
260
coyoluian=Buddleja americana or B. cordata (Díaz 1976)
coyolxochitl/coyoxochitl=p. 267,268 Hernandez Rerum/p. 504, 505, 506 Hernandez
Historia=FC=Bomarea edulis (B. hirtella) (Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo 1989)
or Tabebuia heterophylla (T. pentaphylla) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
coyotlychcaum=Asclepias verticillata (Díaz 1976)
coyotomate=Vitex mollis or V. pyramidata (Díaz 1976)
coyotomatl/coyototomatl=FC=p. 204 Hernandez Rerum/p. 705 Hernandez
Historia=Physalis sp. (Daunay et  al. 2008; Estrada Lugo 1989; Farfán and
Elferink 2010) or Physalis nicandroides (Díaz 1976) or Vitex mollis (Díaz 1976;
Estrada Lugo 1989)
coyoxochitl/coyoxochitl yacapichtlense=p. 374 Hernandez Rerum/p. 796 Hernandez
Historia=?
coyoxihuitl/coyoxiuitl (coyote herb)=pl. 63, 65, 79, 81, 88 Badianus (C-B fol. 36r,
37r, 44r, 45r, 48v)=Loeselia mexicana (Guerra 1952)
coyoxihuitl tlatztalehualtic/coyōxihuitl tlaztalēhualtic (pink coyote herb)=p. 61
Badianus (C-B fol. 35r)=Salvia microphylla (Linares and Bye 2013) or Polanisia
sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Loeselia mexicana (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
or Salvia sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
cozahuique=Ficus congesta (F. fasciculata) (Díaz 1976)
cozcanantzi (revered mother of the jewel)=pl. 67 Badianus (C-B fol. 38r)=Ipomoea
bracteata (Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013; Reko 1947) or Quamoclit bracteata (Eriogonium bracteatum) (Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
cozcaquauhxiuitl=pl. 94 Badianus (C-B. fol. 51v)=FC592=Acourtia moschata
(Perezia moschata) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
coznochnopalli=FC431=Opuntia pseudo-tuna or Opuntia sp. (Estrada Lugo
1989)
cozomecatl=Smilax congesta (S. mexicana) or S. pseudochina (Díaz 1976)
cozticayotli=Cucurbita moschata (Díaz 1976)
cozticcoatzontecoxochitl=Euchile citrina (Encyclia citrina)
coztictepetzacuxochitl=Govenia superba or G. liliacea?
coztic mecapatli tilacensi/cozticmecapatli tilacense=p. 242 Hernandez Rerum/p.
834 Hernandez Historia=Fabaceae?
cozticoatzontecoxochitl=Euchile citrina (Cattleya citrina, Prosthechea citrina)
(Díaz 1976; Ossenbach 2009)
cozticzacatzacuxochitl=Govenia superba (Ossenbach 2009)
cozolmecatl=p. 213 Hernandez Rerum/p. 765 Hernandez Historia=Smilax spinosa
(S. mexicana)
cozticpatli=p. 236 Hernandez Rerum/p. 983 Hernandez Historia=Thalictrum hernandezii or T. mexicanum (Díaz 1976)
coztic patli acatlanensi/cozticpatli acatlanense=p. 235 Hernandez Rerum/p. 987
Hernandez Historia=Thalictrum hernandezii (de Batres et  al. 2012; Ortiz de
Montellano. 1990)
coztictzapotl/cozticzapotl=Pouteria campechiana (Lucuma salicifolia) (Díaz 1976)
coztic xihuitl/coztixihuitl=p. 303 Hernandez Rerum/p. 642 Hernandez
Historia=Vaccinium sp.?
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
261
cozticxocotl=Spondias mombin (Dressler 1953)
coztihuisti palancapatli=Serjania mexicana (Díaz 1976)
coztomate/coztomatl=p. 203 Hernandez Rerum/p. 703 Hernandez Historia=Physalis
coztomatl (Daunay et al. 2008; Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Physalis
sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Solanum lycopersicum (Díaz 1976)
cuachala=Amphipterygium adstringens (Juliania adstringens) (Díaz 1976)
cuachalalate=Amphipterygium adstringens (Juliania adstringens) (Díaz 1976)
cuachichil/cuachil/cuachile=Loeselia mexicana (L. coccinea) (Díaz 1976)
cuachilote=Parmentiera aculeata (P. edulis) (Díaz 1976)
cuahtzitzicaztli=Urera caracasana (Díaz 1976)
cuahuchichi=Penstemon campanulatus (Díaz 1976)
cuaicastle=Ceanothus caeruleus (Díaz 1976)
cualmecatl/cuamecatl=Serjania mexicana (Paullinia mexicana) (Díaz 1976)
cuamecate=Antigonon flavescens (Díaz 1976)
cuamuchil=Pithecellobium dulce (Díaz 1976)
cuamochitl=Pithecellobium dulce (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
cuanaxana=Calea ternifolia var. hypoleuca (C. hypoleuca) (Díaz 1976)
cuanaxonaxi=Croton ciliatoglandulifer (Díaz 1976)
cuapatli=Commelina tuberosa or Tradescantia crassifolia (Díaz 1976)
cuapopolchi=Piqueria trinervia (Díaz 1976)
cuaquil=Celtis caudata (Díaz 1976)
cuartoloti=Andira inermis (Díaz 1976)
cuastecomatl=Crescentia alata (Díaz 1976)
cuatecomate=Crescentia alata (Díaz 1976)
cuauchichi=Garrya ovata (Díaz 1976)
cuauchichic=Garrya laurifolia or G. ovata or Loeselia mexicana (L. coccinea) or
Penstemon campanulatus (Díaz 1976)
cuauhayohtli=Parmentiera aculeata (Crescentia aculeata) (Díaz 1976)
cuauhayohuachili=Jatropha curcas (Díaz 1976)
cuauhtepatli/chupiri=FC=Euphorbia calyculata (Ortiz de Montellano 1975, 1990)
cuahtli=Eisenhardtia sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012)
cuauhtzapotl=Annona aff. cherimola (Zepeda and White 2008) or A. squamosa
(Díaz 1976)
cuauhxihuitl=FC=Senna occidentalis (Estrada Lugo 1989)
cuauhzontli=Chenopodium berlandieri (C. berlandieri subsp. nuttalliae) (Dressler
1953)
cuaulote=Guazuma ulmifolia (G. tomentosa) (Díaz 1976)
cuaunacaxtle=Enterolobium cycloparpum (Díaz 1976)
cuauteco=Heterotheca inuloides (Díaz 1976)
cuautecomate=Crescentia cujete or C. alata (Díaz 1976)
cuautecomatl=Crescentia alata (Díaz 1976)
cuautepatli=Euphorbia calyculata (Díaz 1976)
cuauteteco=Heterotheca inuloides (Díaz 1976)
cuchalolate=Amphipterygium adstringens (Juliania adstringens) (Díaz 1976)
cucoztli=Thalictrum hernandezii (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
262
cuculin=Leptolyngbya tenuis (Phormidium tenue) or Chroococcus turgidus
(Godínez et al. 2001)
cucultzin=Euphorbia seguieriana (E. campestris) (Díaz 1976)
cuechiliz tomatl/cuechyliztomatl=p. 372 Hernandez Rerum/p. 712 Hernandez
Historia=?
cuechxochitl=Plumeria rubra (P. rubra) (Díaz 1976)
cuecuetzpahtli/cuencuetzpatli (mischievous/unabashed remedy)=pl. 82 Badianus
(C-B fol. 45v)=Clinopodium macrostemum (C. laevigatum, Satureja macrostema) (Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés
1964; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
cuetlaxochitl/cuetlaxxochitl=p. 375 Hernandez Rerum/p. 959 Hernandez
Historia=FC685d=Euphorbia pulcherrima (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989;
Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
cueyauh quilitl=p. 375 Hernandez Rerum=Portulaca oleracea?
cuezalmetl=FC=Agave sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
cuicuilticayotli=Cucurbita ficifolia (Díaz 1976)
cuicuitlapile=FC489a=Stachytarpheta sp.?
cuicuitlapilli=p. 248 Hernandez Rerum/p. 722 Hernandez Historia=?
cuitlacamotli=Valeriana sorbifolia (V. toluccana) (Díaz 1976)
cuitlacoche=Ustilago maydis (Díaz 1976)
cuitlaçotl tepecuaquilcensi/cuitlazotl=p. 229 Hernandez Rerum/p. 716 Hernandez
Historia=?
cuitlacopalli=p. 48 Hernandez Rerum/p. 544 Hernandez Historia=Bursera fagaroides (Elaphrium odoratum) or B. simaruba (B. gummifera) (Díaz 1976)
cuitlapatli=Valeriana edulis subsp. procera (Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Valeriana
mexicana (Díaz 1976; Ocaranza 2011) or Euphorbia maculata (Díaz 1976)
cuitlaxochitl=Euphorbia pulcherrima (Díaz 1976)
cuitlazotl=Dysphania ambrosioides (Chenopodium ambrosioides) (Díaz 1976)
cujete=Crescentia cujete (Díaz 1976)
cuiztapaçollin/cuixyapazollin=p. 236 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1002 Hernandez
Historia=Phaseolus sp.?
cungariqua/cunguricua=p. 249 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1008 Hernandez
Historia=Apocynaceae?
cungariqua/cunguricua=p. 249 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1009 Hernandez
Historia=Apocynaceae?
cupitri/cupitin=p. 375 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1004 Hernandez Historia=?
curaqua/pingüica=p. 121 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1006 Hernandez
Historia=Arctostaphylos pungens?
cutaqua=Solandra maxima (S. nitida) (Díaz 1976)
cutaquatzitziqui=Solandra maxima (S. nitida) or Swartzia nitida (Díaz 1976)
cutiriqui=Calochortus purpureus (C. bonplandianus) (Díaz 1976; Farfán and
Elferink 2010)
cuyotomate=Vitex mollis or V. pyramidata (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
263
ecapacle/ecapatli/hecapatli=p. 112 Hernandez Rerum/p. 412 Hernandez
Historia=FC514=Senna alata (Cassia alata) or C. occidentalis (Díaz 1976;
Estrada Lugo 1989)
ecuicuilli=FC=Phaseolus coccineus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ecuxo=FC=Nicotiana sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
eeloquiltic/eloquilitic/eloquilitl=FC529=Iresine calea (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989) or Amaranthus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Bidens pilosa (Estrada Lugo
1989) or B. aurea (B. tetragona) (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Peperomia sp. (Estrada
Lugo 1989) or Piper sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ekkixil=Dolichandra unguis-cati (Bignonia unguis-cati) (Díaz 1976)
eloçacatl/elozacatl (tender-ear-of-maize grass)=pl. 54, 110 Badianus (C-B fol. 31v,
59v)=Rumex sp. (Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Cynodon sp.? (Guerra 1952;
Reko 1947) or Equisetum myriochaetum (Bye and Linares 2013) or Cynodon
dactylon (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
elote=Zea mays (Rivera Morales 1941)
elocapolin (tender-ear-of-maize cherry)=pl. 86 Badianus (C-B fol. 47v)=Prunus
serotina subsp. capuli (Díaz 1976; Linares and Bye 2013; Reko 1947; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Ardisia sp. (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
elochiquahuitl=Magnolia schiedeana (Zepeda and White 2008)
eloquiltic=FC497=Amaranthus sp.?
eloquilitl (edible herb of the tender corncob)=FC=Bidens pilosa (Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1987 in Picó and Nuez 2000a)
elosuchil=Magnolia macrohylla var. dealbata (M. dealbata) (Díaz 1976)
eloxochitl/ēlō-xōchitl/eloxochiquauitl (tender-ear-of-maize flower)=pl. 60, 69, 70
Badianus (C-B fol. 34v, 39r, 39v)=FC=Magnolia schiedeana (Alcántara Rojas
2008; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947; Zepeda and White
2008) or Magnolia macrophylla var. dealbata (M. dealbata) (Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1989; Linares and Bye 2013) or Magnolia sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012)
elozacatl=Cynodon dactylon (Capriola dactylon) (Díaz 1976)
enguanche=Bocconia arborea (Díaz 1976)
epaxihuitl=Croton vulpinus? (Ocaranza 2011)
epazotl/epaçotl/epazote=FC=Dysphania ambrosioides (Chenolpodium ambrosoides) (Comas et al. 1995; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Pico and Nuez 2000b;
Ocaranza 2011; Ortiz de Montellano 1975, 1990) or Chenopodium vulvaria (C.
foetidum) (Díaz 1976)
epitactli=FC=Phaseolus coccineus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
equimitl=FC=Erythrina mexicana (Díaz 1976)
eratihueni=Cuphea jorullensis (Díaz 1976)
estachahuit=Conocarpus erectus (Díaz 1976)
etenquilitl=FC=Phaseolus vulgaris (Estrada Lugo 1989)
etzpatli/ezptli/totonquixihuitl/totoncaxihuitl=Croton gosypiifolius (C. sanguifluus)
or C. cortesianus (Comas et al. 1995)
etzapotl/etzaptl/quauhtzapotl=FC=Annona aff. cherimola (Zepeda and White 2008)
or Annona sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
etzquahuitl=Croton gossypiifolius (C. sanguifluus) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
264
ezpahtli/ezpatli (blood remedy) pl. 33 Badianus (C-B fol. 20r)=FC=Croton draco
(Estrada Lugo 1989; Reko 1947) or Croton gossypiifolius (C. sanguifluus) (Díaz
1976) or Bouvardia ternifolia (Bye and Linares 2013) or Jatropha dioica (J.
spathulata) or Pterocarpus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Bouvardia sp. (Guerra
1952)
ezquahuitl=Croton gossypiifolius (C. sanguifluus) (Ortiz de Montellano 1990) or C.
draco (Díaz 1976) or C. suberosus (C. cladotrichus) (Díaz 1976)
hacayotli=Cucurbita moschata (Díaz 1976)
haceoitli=Indigofera suffruticosa (I. anil) (Díaz 1976)
hachoque=Piper palmeri (Díaz 1976)
hahuiyacxihuitl (fragrant herb)=pl. 107 Badianus (C-B fol. 58r)=Lippia graveolens
(L. berlandieri) (Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947; Valdés
Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or L. mexicana (Linares and Bye 2013) or Alnus sp.
(Miranda and Valdés 1964)
hanchinol=Heimia salicifolia or Nesaea syphilitica (Heimia syphilitica) (Díaz
1976)
hatanal=Celosia virgata (Díaz 1976)
hauayche=Ageratum littorale (Díaz 1976)
hecapahtli/hecapatli/ehcapahtli (wind remedy)=pl. 33, 65, 70, 87, 90 Badianus
(C-B fol. 20r, 37r, 39v, 48r, 49v)=Senna occidentalis (Guerra 1952; Miranda and
Valdés 1964; Reko 1947)
hiacamote=Manihot esculenta (M. utilissima) (Díaz 1976)
hoaca xochitl=p. 377 Hernandez Rerum=Araceae?
hoauhquilitl=p. 269 Hernandez Rerum=Chenopodium sp. (Altamirano 1896)
hoauhtli=FC=Amaranthus hypochondriacus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
hoaxin=Senna sophera (Cassia esculenta) or Leucaena esculenta (Díaz 1976)
huaxui=Leucaena esculenta (Altamirano 1896)
hoehoetzontecomatl=Aristolochia odoratissima (Díaz 1976)
hoeiamatl=Ficus congesta (F. fasciculata) (Díaz 1976)
hoeipochotli=Pseudobombax ellipticum (Bombax ellipticum) (Altamirano 1896)
hoitzcolotli=p. 222 Hernandez Rerum=Eryngium deppeanum (E. painteri) (Díaz
1976)
hoitziloxitl=p. 51 Hernandez Rerum/p. 559 Hernandez Historia=Myroxylon balsamum var. pereirae (Toluifera pereirae) or Myroxylon sonsonatense? (Díaz 1976;
Ocaranza 2011)
hoitzilziltenxochitl=p. 379 Hernandez Rerum=Ranunculus sp.?
hoitzit xilxochitl=p. 103 Hernandez Rerum=Salvia sp.?
hoitzitziltentli=Lobelia laxiflora (Díaz 1976)
hoitzitzilxochitl=Loeselia mexicana (L. coccinea) (Díaz 1976)
hoitzmamaxalli=Acacia cornigera (Díaz 1976)
hoitzocuitlapilli=Disocactus flagelliformis (Aporocactus flagelliformis) (Díaz 1976)
hoitzquahuitl=Caesalpinia vesicaria or Haematoxylum campechianum (Díaz 1976)
or Caesalpinia sp. (Altamirano 1896)
hoixachinquahuitl=Havardia albicans (Pithecellobium albicans) (Altamirano
1896; de Batres et al. 2012; Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
265
holcuahuitl/holquahuitl=Castilla elastica (Altamirano 1896; Farfán and Elferink
2010; Ocaranza 2011)
holli (ulli)=pl. 78 Badianus (C-B Fol. 43v)=resin of Castilla elastica (Guerra 1952)
huauhtli=Amaranthus sp. (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
huacalxochitl/huacalxōchitl (huacal flower)=pl. 14, 30, 46, 70, 104 Badianus (C-B
fol. 10v, 18v, 27v, 39v, 56v)=Xanthosoma sagittifolium (X. roseum), Anthurium
cordatum (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Philodendron radiatum var. pseudoradiatum (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or
Philodendron mexicanum (Alcántara Rojas 2008; Bye and Linares 2013) or
Philodendron sp. (Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
huacalazochitl=Philodendron aff. mexicanum (Zepeda and White 2008)
huacamote/huacamotl/huacamotli=Maniot esculenta (M. aipi, M. utilissima)
(Díaz 1976)
huacanala=Morella cerifera (Myrica xalapensis) (Díaz 1976)
huachacata=Galphimia glauca (Díaz 1976)
huachichile=Loeselia scariosa (Díaz 1976)
huachipil=Alvaradoa amorphoides (Díaz 1976)
huamuch/huamuchi/huamuchil/huitzquahuitl/quamochitl/
coacamachalli=Pithecellobium dulce (Comas et  al. 1995; Díaz 1976) or
Pithecellobium unguis-cati (Inga unguis-cati) or Haematoxylum campechianum
(Comas et al. 1995)
huanacaxtle=Enterolobium cyclocarpum (Díaz 1976)
huanchal=Trophis racemosa (Díaz 1976)
huanini=Bourreria huanita (Díaz 1976)
huatari=Lophophora williamsii (Díaz 1976)
huauachinoli/huauchinal/huauchinol=Heimia salicifolia (Díaz 1976)
huauhtli=Amaranthus caudatus (A. leucocarpus) (Dressler 1953)
huauhtzontli/uauhtzontli (hair of the huauhquilitl)=Chenopodium berlandieri
(C. berlandieri subsp. nuttalliae) (Dressler 1953; Picó and Nuez 2000b;
Safford 1918)
huaxacan/huaxaxan=Guaiacum sanctum (Díaz 1976)
huehuelicaton=Matelea reticulata (Gonolobus reticulatus) (Díaz 1976)
hueitlachpaoaztli=Oenothera laciniata (Díaz 1976)
huetzcanixochitl (flower that habitually laughs)=pl. 67 Badianus (C-B fol.
38r)=Zephyranthes sp. (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or
Z. fosteri (Linares and Bye 2013) or Z. brevipes (Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
hueynacatztli/huēinacaztli (large ear)=pl. 70, 104 Badianus (C-B fol. 39v,
56v)=Cymbopetalum penduliflorum (Comas et  al. 1995; de Ávila Blomberg
2012; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Enterolobium cyclocarpum (Comas et  al.
1995; Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
huicahoatl=Quercus ellptica (Q. lanceolata) (Díaz 1976)
huichichile=Loeselia mexicana (L. coccinea) (Díaz 1976)
huichichilemetl=Xylosma flexuosa (Díaz 1976)
huichoquachaqua=Iostephane heterophylla (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
266
huihuitz mallotic (full of needles)=pl. 52, 59 Badianus (C-B fol. 30v, 34r)=Mentzelia
hispida (Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947; Linares and Bye 2013; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
huihuitz yocochizxihuitl/huīhuitzyoh cochizxihuitl (thorny sleep herb)=pl. 20
Badianus (C-B fol. 13v)=Mimosa albida (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976;
Guerra 1952; Reko 1947; Viesca and Aranda 1996) or M. ervendbergii (Bye and
Linares 2013) or Mimosa sp. (Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Mimosa sp.
(Miranda and Valdés 1964)
huilote=Vitex mollis or V. pyrimidata (Díaz 1976)
huinacaxtle=Enterolobium cyclocarpum (Díaz 1976)
huiquilitl=Indigofera suffruticosa (I. anil) (Díaz 1976)
huitlacoche=Ustilago maydis (Díaz 1976)
huitzcolotl=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (Díaz 1976)
huitzcolohtli/uuitzcolohtli/huitzcoloxochitl/huitzcōlohtli (thorny curved)=pl. 33
Badianus (C-B fol. 20r)=Berberis sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Condalia sp.
or Solanum sp. (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
huitzihtzilxochitl (humming bird flower)=pl. 66, 92, 113 Badianus (C-B fol. 37v,
50v, 61r)=p. 78 Hernandez Rerum=Loeselia mexicana (L. coccinea) (Guerra
1952; Reko 1947) or Salvia gesneriiflora (Díaz 1976) or Salvia sp. (Linares and
Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
huitziloxitl=Myroxylon balsamum or M. balsamum var. pereirae (Díaz 1976)
huitzitzillacotl=Zephyranthes sp. (de Batres et al. 2012)
huitzilzitzin/huitzitziltzin/huitzitzilxochitl=Loeselia mexicana (L. coccinea) (Díaz
1976; Viesca and Aranda 1996)
huitzmamaxalli=p. 86 Hernandez Rerum=Acacia sp.?
huitzpatli=Baccharis conferta (Díaz 1976)
huitzqua(h)uitl/huitz-cuahuitl (spiny tree)=pl. 68, 70, 78 Badianus (C-B fol. 38v,
39v, 43v)=Haematoxylum brasiletto (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976;
Farfán and Elferink 2010; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992; Viesca and Aranda 1996)
or Condalia hookeri (C. obovata) (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or H. campechianum (Linares and Bye 2013)
huitzquilitl (thorny edible herb)=p. 10, 73, 79, 90 Badianus (C-B fol. 8v, 41r, 44r,
49v)=Cirsium ehrenbergii (Bye and Linares 2013; de Ávila Blomberg 2012;
Linares and Bye 2013; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992; Zapeda and
White 2008) or Cirsium sp. (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
huitztomatzin=p. 108 Hernandez Rerum/p. 707 Hernandez Historia=Solanum
hernandesii (Díaz 1976)
huixochi/huixachi=FC=Acacia farnesiana (Estrada Lugo 1989)
icçotl=FC387=Cycadaceae?
icçotl=FC691=?
ichcatl=p. 308 Hernandez=Gossypium hirsutum (G. mexicanum)
ichcatlepatli/ichcatlepahtli/ychcatlepatli=p. 442 Hernandez Rerum/p. 181
Hernandez Historia=Cordia bullata var. globosa (C. globosa) or C. sonorae
(Díaz 1976) or Croton sp.
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
267
iczotli/izote=FC=Yucca gigantea (Y. elephantipes) (Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo
1989) or Y. aloifolia (Estrada Lugo 1989; Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Y. faxoniana (Y. australis) (Díaz 1976) or Y. filamentosa (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Yucca sp.
(Altamirano 1896; Estrada Lugo 1989)
ili/ilitl=Betula sp. (Siméon 2010)
illamatzapotl=Annona muricata (Díaz 1976)
ipazote=Chenopodium vulvaria (C. graveolens) or Dysphania ambrosioides
(Chenopodium ambrosioides) (Díaz 1976)
itzauhyatl=Artemisia mexicana (Farfán and Elferink 2010; Ocaranza 2011)
itzcuinpatli/itzcuinpahtli/ytzcuinpahtli (dog remedy)=pl. 46, 62, 65, 66 Badianus
(C-B fol. 27v, 35r, 37r, 37v)=FC632=Plumbago pulchella (Díaz 1976; Ortiz de
Montellano 1975, 1990) or Schoenocaulon oficinale (Veratrum officinale) (Díaz
1976; Reko 1947) or Roldana ehrenbergiana (Senecio canicidus) (Altamirano
1896; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Flores 1886–1888, 1:240; Guerra 1952;
Ramírez and Alcocer 1902; Siméon 2010) or Anticlea frigida (Stenanthium frigidum, Veratrum frigidum)? (Reko 1947) or Plumbago pulchella (Miranda and
Valdés 1964) or Solanum sp.? (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Phytolacca icosandra (Bye and Linares 2013)
itzcuinyoyotli=Roldana ehrenbergiana (Senecio canicidus) (Díaz 1976)
itzmaqua=Laelila speciosa (Ossenbach 2009)
itzmiquilitl (arrow-shaped edible herb)=FC464a=Portulaca sp. (Estrada Lugo
1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a)
itztac quilitl (salty edible herb)=FC521=Pistacia mexicana (Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Fabaceae
itztamatl=Pseudobombax ellipticum (Bombax ellipticum) (Díaz 1976)
itztauhyatl=FC=Artemsia mexicana (Ortiz de Montellano 1975)
ixpostli/ixpul=Pinaropappus roseus (Díaz 1976)
iyamolin=Phytolacca icosandra (Díaz 1976) or Phytolacca octandra (Altamirano
1896)
izcatl=Gossypium hirsutum (Dressler 1953)
izcuinpahtli=Roldana ehrenbergiana (Senecio canicidus) (Díaz 1976)
izote=Yucca faxoniana (Y. australis) (Díaz 1976)
izpacihuitl=Croton dioicus (Díaz 1976)
izquixochitl/izquixochiquauitl (fragrant flower tree)=p. 292
Sahagún=FC685a=Bourreria huanita (B. formosa) (Alcántara Rojas 2008;
Altamirano 1896; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or B. litoralis or Bourreria sp.
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
iztacatzoyatl=Senecio salignus (Díaz 1976)
iztacayotli=Cucurbita pepo (Díaz 1976)
iztacaxixpatli=FC=Persicaria punctata (Polygonum acre) or Polygonum aviculare
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
iztacchichicquauitl=FC=Garrya laurifolia (Estrada Lugo 1989)
iztacetl=FC=Phaseolus coccineus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
iztac nochnopalli=FC533=Packera bellidifolia (Senecio vulneraria)
itzacoanenepili=Cissampelos pareira (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
268
iztac ocoxochitl=Didymaea mexicana (Díaz 1976)
iztac palancapatli=FC=Packera bellidifolia (Senecio vulneraria) (Díaz 1976;
Estrada Lugo 1989)
iztac patli/iztacquauitl=FC563=Pediomelum pentaphyllum (Psoralea pentaphylla) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Matelea
reticulata (Gonolobus reticulatus) (Díaz 1976) or Dalea lutea (Parosela plumosa) (Díaz 1976)
iztacpatli chichipiltic=Pseudognaphalium canescens (Gnaphalium canescens)
(Farfán and Elferink 2010)
iztacpatlipipitzahoac=Polygala verticillata (Díaz 1976)
iztacquauhxiotl=Pseudosmodingium perniciosum (Díaz 1976)
iztacquauitl=FC=Mariosousa willardiana (Acacia willardiana) (Estrada Lugo
1989) or Ceiba sp. or Maytenus phyllanthoides (Estrada Lugo 1989)
iztactepetzacuxochitl=Govenia liliacea (Ossenbach 2009)
iztactlalamatl=Desmodium triflorum (D. stipulaceum) (Díaz 1976)
iztactzilacayotli=Cucurbita pepo (Díaz 1976)
iztaczapotl/iztactzapotl=Casimiroa edulis (del Pozo 1966; Díaz 1976) or C. pubescens (Díaz 1976)
iztaczazalic=FC=Ipomoea orizabensis (I. longipedunculata) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
iztamatl=Pseudobombax ellipticum (Bombax ellipticum) (Díaz 1976)
iztaquilitl/iztaquiltic=FC=Portulaca oleracea or Suaeda suffrutescens or S. torreyana
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
iztauhyatl=FC567=Artemisia mexicana (Comas et  al. 1995; Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1989; Ortiz de Montellano 1990) or A. longifolia (Estrada Lugo 1989)
iztecauhticmixitl=FC=Argemone mexicana (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Bocconia frutescens (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Commelina erecta or C. pallida or C. tuberosa
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
itztolin/itztolli=FC639b=Cyperus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
macahuite=Cordia bossieri or Ficus insipida (F. glabrata) or F. aurea (F. tecolutensis) (Díaz 1976)
maçayelli/mazāyēlli (deer liver)=pl. 22 Badianus (C-B fol. 14v)=Smilax sp. (Bye
and Linares 2013; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
maçaxocotl=FC417=Spondias mombin?
macazpipilloli=p. 388 Hernandez Rerum=Quamoclit bracteata (Exogonium
bracteatum)?
macolcol=FC=Agave sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
macoztic metl=FC524=Agave atrovirens?
macpalxochi quahuitl=p. 383,459 Hernandez Rerum=Chiranthodendron pentadactylon (C. platanoides) (Reko 1947; Safford 1912)
macpalxóchitl/macpilxóchitl/mapilxóchitl/mācpalxōchitl=pl. 57 Badianus(C-B fol.
33r)=FC=Cheiranthodendron pentacactylon (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz
1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Ortis de
Montellano 1990; Zepeda and White 2008)
macuil/macuili/maculiz=Tabebuia heterophylla (T. pentaphylla) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
269
macuilxochitl=p. 155 Hernandez Rerum/p. 649 Hernandez Historia=FC678a=Tagetes
erecta or T. patula (Estrada Lugo 1989)
maguey=FC=Agave americana or A. atrovirens or A. salmiana (A. cochlearis)
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
mahuitli=Indigofera suffruticosa (I. anil) (Díaz 1976)
malinalli/malinalxochitl/malīnalli (twisted [object])=pl. 18, 33, 108 Badianus (C-B
fol. 12v, 20r, 58v)=Muhlenbergia macroura (Bye and Linares 2013; de Ávila
Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992; Zepeda and White 2008)
mamaxtla/mā-māxtla (loincloths)=p. 59, 60 Badianus (C-B fol. 34r, 34v)=FC466d=p.
265 Sahagún=Rumex sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Rumex mexicanus (Díaz 1976 ) or Iresine calea
(Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 201; Reko 1947) or Iresine sp. (Estrada Lugo
1989)
mamaxtlaquilitl=FC=Iresine sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
mamaxtlanelhuatl (many roots)=pl. 75 Badianus (C-B fol. 42r)=Iresine calea
(Guerra 1952)
manenepili=Pleopeltis macrocarpa (Polypodium lanceolatum) (Díaz 1976)
mapasuchil=Chiranthodendron pentadactylon (Díaz 1976)
mapilxochitl=FC=Chiranthodendron pentadactylon (Díaz 1976)
mastuerzo=FC=Tropaeolum majus (Estrada Lugo 1989; Pico and Nuez 2000b)
matilishuate=Tabebuia heterophylla (T. pentaphylla) (Díaz 1976)
matlacuahuitl=Guaiacum sanctum (Díaz 1976) or G. officinale (Comas et al. 1995)
matlalin/matlalli=FC=Commelinia sp.? (Altamirano 1896) or Commelina erecta or
C. tuberosa or Tradescantia sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
matlaliztic/matlalitztic=Commelina pallida (Comas et al. 1995; Ortiz de Montellano
1990) or C. coelestris (Díaz 1976) or C. diffusa (Díaz 1976) or C. erecta (Díaz
1976) or C. tuberosa (Comas et al. 1995)
matlatlquahuitl=Guaiacum sanctum (Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
matlalxihuitl=FC=Tradescantia crassifolia (Estrada Lugo 1989; Rivera Morales
1941)
matlalxochitl/mātlalxōchitl (blue/green flower)=pl. 14 Badianus (C-B fol.
10v)=Commelina coelestis (Bye and Linares 2013; de Ávila Blomberg 2012;
Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or C. pallida
(Reko 1947) or Commelina sp. (Guerra 1952)
matlaxihuitl=FC=Commelina sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
matzatli/matzali=p. 311 Hernandez Rerum=Ananas comosus (A. sativus) (Díaz
1976; Zepeda and White 2008)
mazaxochotli/mazacaxocotl/mazaxocotl=p. 384 Hernandez Rerum=Spondias purpurea (de Batres et al. 2012) or S. mombin (Estrada Lugo 1989)
matzapotl=Annona cherimola (Díaz 1976)
maxacocote=Cyrtocarpoa procera (Díaz 1976)
maxten=FC=Allium sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
mazacoanenepilli=Passiflora suberosa (Díaz 1976)
mazacoxocoyl=Spondias sp.? (Altamirano 1896)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
270
mazatanes=Valeriana ceratophylla (Díaz 1976)
mazatlxocotl=Spondias purpurea (Díaz 1976)
mecacahoatl=Theobroma cacao (Díaz 1976)
mecapatli=Smilax aristolochiifolia (Smilax medica) (Díaz 1976; Ocaranza 2011;
Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
mecapatli mecatlanensi/mecapatli mecatlanense=p. 304 Hernandez Rerum/p. 757
Hernandez Historia=Ipomoea purpurea (Díaz 1976)
mecapatli o zarzaparrilla=p. 288 Hernandez Rerum/p. 759 Hernandez
Historia=Smilax moranensis (Díaz 1976)
mecaxochitl/mecaxōchitl (cord flower)=pl. 70, 104 Badianus (C-B fol. 39v, 56v)=p.
144 Hernandez Rerum/p. 750 Hernandez Historia=p. 287 Sahagún=FC=Piper
amalago (Comas et al. 1995; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Estrada Lugo 1989; Ortiz
de Montellano 1990) or Peperomia sp. (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Reko 1947) or Vanilla planifolia (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Linares and Bye
2013; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Piper umbellatum (P. cuernavacanum) or
Piper sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
memeya/memeyal/memealxihuitl=FC556, 664=Euphorbia sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
memeyalquahuitl=Protium heptaphyllum (Díaz 1976)
memeyaxiuhtontli/memeyaxihuitl/mē-mēya-xihuitl (herb [with sap] flowing
abundantly)=pl. 111 Badianus (C-B fol. 60r)=Euphorbia maculata (de Ávila
Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947;
Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or E. hirta (Linares and Bye 2013) or Euphorbia sp.
(Guerra 1952)
metl=p. 270 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1037 Hernandez Historia=Agave atrovirens
(Comas et al. 1995; Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953)
metl coztli/mecoztli=p. 271 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1040 Hernandez Historia=Agave
sp.?
metztliyçacauh (the moon’s grass)=pl. 67 Badianus (C-B fol. 38r)=Sprekelila formosissima? (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or Polianthes
tuberosa (Linares and Bye 2013) or Liliaceae?
metzolle/metzollin=Mammillaria bicolor (Díaz 1976)
mexcalmetl=p. 272 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1043 Hernandez Historia=Agave horrida
(Díaz 1976)
mexixquilitl/mexix-quilitl (mexixin edible herb)=pl. 34 Badianus (C-B fol.
20v)=Lepidium sordidum (L. granulare) (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or L. virginicum (Bye
and Linares 2013) or L. sativum (Guerra 1952)
mexixquilitl (water cress potherb or golden saxifrage potherb)=p. 161
Hernandez=Tropaeolum sp. or Lepidium sativum (Reko 1947) or L. virginicum
(Pico and Nuez 2000b)
mexocotl=p. 271 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1044 Hernandez Historia=FC=Bromelia pinguin (Ortiz de Montellano 1975, 1990) or B. humilis (Díaz 1976)
mexoxoctli/mexoxochtli=FC=Agave sisalana (A. ridida var. sisalana) (Estrada Lugo
1989)
mezcal=Lophophora williamsii (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
271
mezquitl=Prosopis juliflora (Díaz 1976)
micaquahuitl=Cordia brossieri (Díaz 1976) or Ipomoea murucoides (Díaz 1976;
Standley 1920–1926:1205)
micatlach pahoaztli=p. 386 Hernandez Rerum=?
mica xoxo coyollin/micaxoxocoioli (sorrel of the deaths)=p. 386 Hernandez
Rerum=FC=Oxalis hernandezii (Estrada Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a)
miccauexotl=FC=Salix sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
miccaxoxocoyoli=FC=Oxalis hernandezii (Estrada Lugo 1989)
michiuauhtli (fish grain)=pl. 113 Badianus (C-B fol. 61r)=FC=Amaranthus hybridus (Miranda and Valdés 1964) or A. cuentus (A. paniculatus) (Estrada Lugo
1989) or Chenopodium berlandieri (C. berlandieri subsp. nuttalliae) (Díaz 1976;
Guerra 1952)
michpatli=Buddleia sp.? (Altamirano 1896)
micle=Jacobionia spicigera (Díaz 1976)
miltomates=FC=Physalis aequata or P. peruviana, or P. philadelphica (Daunay
et al. 2008; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Solanum lycopersicum (Lycopersicon esculentum) (Estrada Lugo 1989) or P. angulata (Estrada Lugo 1989)
miltomatl=p. 295 Hernandez Rerum/p. 701 Hernandez Historia=Physalis ixocarpa
(Dressler 1953; Daunay et al. 2008)
mispatle=Buddleja sessiliflora (Díaz 1976)
misquicopalli=Prosopis juliflora (Díaz 1976)
mixitl=FC452b=Datura stramonium (Daunay et al. 2008; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989)
mixixe=Lepidum armoracia (L. intermedium) (Díaz 1976)
mixtlaxihuitl=Lopezia racemosa (Díaz 1976)
mizquitl/mizquite/miquahuitl (moon to come forth from)=pl. 14 Badianus (C-B fol.
10v)=p. 455 Hernandez Rerum=FC423=Prosopis juliflora (Altamirano 1896;
Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Ortiz de
Montellano 1990) or Prosopis chilensis (Reko 1947) or Pithecellobium circinale
(Inga circinalis, Mimosa circinalis) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Prosopis
laevigata (P. dulcis) or Prosopis sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
mizquixochicopalli=Bursera graveolens (Díaz 1976)
moçoquilitl/mozoquilitl (sticky edible herb)=FC469b=Ageratina deltoidea
(Eupatorium deltoideum) (Estrada Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a; Estrada
Lugo 1989)
mocuepanixochitl (flower that habitually turns)=pl. 67 Badianus (C-B fol.
38r)=Penstemon sp. (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Convolvulaceae (Linares and
Bye 2013)
mohuitli/mohintle=p. 387 Hernandez Rerum/p. 236 Hernandez Historia=Justicia
spicigera (Díaz 1976)
moictle=Justicia spicigera (Díaz 1976)
molle=p. 54 Hernandez Rerum/p. 281 Hernandez Historia=Schinus molle?
molonqui=Cissus verticillata (C. sicyoides) or C. tiliacea (Vitis tiliacea) (Díaz
1976)
moyotli/moytli/mozote=Justicia spicigera (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
272
muchite/muchitl=Pithecellobium dulce (Díaz 1976)
muicle/muitle=Justicia spicigera (Díaz 1976)
nacaetolin/nacacetoli=FC=Cyperus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
nacapuli=Ficus pertusa (F. padifolia) (Díaz 1976)
nacazcolotl=FC=Caesalpinia coriaria (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Enterolobium cyclocarpum (Altamirano 1896)
nacazul/nacazcul=Datura wrightii (D. innoxia) (Safford 1920, p. 549) or D. stramonium (Díaz 1976)
nahuitepuz/nahuitiput=Verbesina crocata (Bidens crocata) (Díaz 1976; Ocaranza
2011)
namole=Phytolacca americana (P. decandra), P. octandra, or P. rugosa (Díaz 1976)
nanacace=FC=Byrsonima crassifolia (B. cotinifolia) or Senecio ovalifolius (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
nanacate/nanacatl=Panaeolus sphinctrinus (Díaz 1976) or Inocybe sp. or Panaeolus
sp. or Psathyrella sp. or Psilocybe sp. or Stropharia sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
nanahuapatli=Packera bellidifolia (Senecio vulneraria) or Solidago sempervirens
var. mexicana (Díaz 1976)
nance/nanche/nanchi=Byrsonima crassifolia (Díaz 1976)
nantzinquahuitl=Byrsonima crassifolia (Díaz 1976)
nantzinxocotl=Byrsonima crassifolia (Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953)
nanzenquahuitl=Byrsonima crassifolia (Díaz 1976)
nauiytepuzt=p. 189 Hernandez Rerum=Smallanthus sp.?
nautzinxocotl=Malpighia sp.? (Altamirano 1896)
necouhxochitl/neuc-xōchitl (honey flower)=pl. 97 Badianus (C-B fol. 53r)=Plumeria
rubra (P. acutifolia) (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye
2013; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
nequametl=p. 273 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1051 Hernandez Historia=FC=Agave mexicana (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Dasylirion sp.?
nequametl=FC753=Agave vera-cruz (A. mexicana) (Díaz 1976) or A. potatorum
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
nequen/henequen=FC=Agave fourcroydes or A. sisalana (Estrada Lugo 1989)
nere=Hymenaea courabil (Díaz 1976)
nesesehuilone=Geranium mexicanum (Díaz 1976)
nestamalxochitl=FC=Ranunculus petiolaris (Estrada Lugo 1989)
netzahyualxochitl=Phyla scaberrima (Lippia dulcis) (Díaz 1976)
nexehuac/nex-ēhua-c (it has turned ashen)=pl. 49 Badianus (C-B fol. 29r)=Datura
ceratocaula (Bye and Linares 2013; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Guerra
1952; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Datura sp. (Furst 1995;
Miranda and Valdés 1964)
nexmetl=FC=Agave sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
nexmitzi=Artemisia mexicana (Díaz 1976)
nextalpe/tlanoquizpatli=p. 178 Hernandez Rerum=Guilleminea densa or
Alternanthera sessilis (A. repens) (Bye and Linares 1990)
nextamalxochitl=FC678d=Ranunculus petiolaris (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
niamoli yamoli=Phytolacca rugosa (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
273
niamolli=Phytolacca octandra (Díaz 1976)
niiche=Coccoloba uvifera (Díaz 1976)
nikte=Plumeria rubra (P. acutifolia) (Díaz 1976)
nixtamalxochitl=Ranuncularis petiolaris or Tecoma stans (Díaz 1976)
nocheznopalli/nopalnocheztli=pl. 38 Badianus (C-B fol. 22v)=p. 78 Hernandez
Rerum=Nopalea cochenillifera (Reko 1947)
nocheznopalli/nopalnocheztli/nocheztli=p. 78 Hernandez Rerum/p. 943 Hernandez
Historia=Nopalea cochenillifera (Dressler 1953)
nocheznopalli/nopalnocheztli/napalnocheztli/nopalnocheztli/nocheztli=p. 78, 459
Hernandez Rerum/p. 943, 945 Hernandez Historia=Nopalea cochenillifera
(Dressler 1953)
nocheztli (blood of the nopal)=pl. 38 Badianus (C-B fol. 22v)=Nopalea cochenillifera (Guerra 1952)
nochtli (primary name)=pl. 106 Badianus (C-B fol. 57v)=Opuntia sp. (Reko 1947)
or O. ficus-indica or O. megacantha or O. streptacantha (Dressler 1953) or O.
ficus-indica or Cylindropuntia imbricata (O. imbricata) (Díaz 1976) or Opuntia
sp. (Guerra 1952)
nocuana/nocuana-nui=Panaeolus sphinctrinus (Díaz 1976)
nonochto (insignificant little catci that come out of anthills)=p. 392 Hernandez
Rerum=Portulaca sp.?
nonochton azcapa’yxua/nōnōchtōn āzcapan ixhua (insignificant little catci that
come up around anthills)=pl. 47 Badianus (C-B fol. 28r)=Portulaca pilosa (de
Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976) or Pereskiopsis sp. or Nopalxochia sp. (Guerra
1952; Reko 1947)
nonoquitlitl=Luffa operculata or Sechiopsis triqueter (Díaz 1976)
nopal/nopalli/nohpalli (primary name)=pl. 90 Badianus (C-B fol. 49v)=FC=Nopalea
cochenillifera or Opuntia ficus-indica or O. megacantha or O. streptacantha
(Dressler 1953) or O. tuna or O. ficus-indica (Díaz 1976) or Opuntia/Nopalea sp.
(Miranda and Valdés 1964) or O. ficus-indica or O. maxima (O. amyclaea) or O.
megarhiza or O. streptacantha (Estrada Lugo 1989) or O. microdasys (Guerra
1952)
nopalnocheztli=Opuntia ficus-indica (Díaz 1976)
nopalxochicuezaltic/nepalxochcuezalticquizi/nopalxochitl/nochxochitl=p. 392,
457/p. 930, 931 Hernandez Historia=FC713b=Disocactus phyllanthoides
(Nopalxochia phyllanthoides) or D. ackermannii (Epiphyllum ackermanii) (Díaz
1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
noriten=Agastache mexicana (Cedronella mexicana) (Díaz 1976)
oaxin=Leucaena esculenta (Díaz 1976)
ocelometl=FC=Agave sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
oceloxochitl=FC727a=Tigridia pavonia (Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo
19890; Safford 1912; Zepeda and White 2008) or Tigridia sp. (Estrada Lugo
1989)
ochmuul=Triumfetta semitriloba (Díaz 1976)
ococoxochitl=Dahlia coccinea (Díaz 1976)
ocolintequitcua=Spigelia anthelmia (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
274
ocopetlatl=FC651=Alsophila firma (Cyathea mexicana) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ocopetalatlyatlanuac=Campyloneuron phylitidis or Niphidium crassifolium
(Pleopeltis crassifolia, Polypodium crassifolium) (Díaz 1976)
ocopiatztli=FC576=p. 222 Hernandez Rerum/p. 350 Hernandez Historia=Eryngium
foetidum (not E. aquaticum, E. beecheyanum, or E. painteri)?
ocopiaztli=FC=Polianthes geminiflora (Bravoa geminiflora) or Eryngium painteri
(Díaz 1976) or Eryngium beecheyanum (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
ocopichin/ocopipin=Cosmos diversifolius (Díaz 1976)
ocoquilitl/ocoquiltic (resinous edible herb)=FC=p. 393 Hernandez Rerum/p. 358
Hernandez Historia=Lactuca spp. or Sonchus oleraceus (Estrada Lugo 1987 in
Pico and Nuez 2000a) or Launaea intybacea (Lactuca intybacea) (Díaz 1976)
ocosuchil=Didymaea mexicana (Díaz 1976)
ocotl/ocote/ocotl/oxitl (pine)=pl. 70 Badianus (C-B fol. 39v) FC377=Pinus teocote
(Altamirano 1896; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Rivera Morales
1941; Standley 1920–1926:56) or Pinus sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
ocotzoquauitl=FC=Liquidambar styraciflua (Díaz 1976; Ortiz de Montellano 1975;
Standley 1920–1926:317) or Pinus teocote (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ocotzotl=FC=Liquidambar styraciflua (Estrada Lugo 1989; Ortiz de Montellano
1990) or Pinus teocote (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ocoxochitl (pine flower)=p. 14, 60, 75, 76, 99 Badianus (C-B fol. 10v, 34v, 42r, 42v,
54r)=FC=p. 288 Sahagún=FC=Didymaea mexicana (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989; Guerra 1952; Martinez 1969:231; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947)
ocoxote/ocozote=Liquidambar styraciflua (Díaz 1976)
octli=p. 101, 106, 111 (C-B fol. 55r, 57v, 60r)=wine from pulque (Guerra 1952)
ohuaxocoyolin/ohua-xocoyōlin (maize-stalk acidic plant)=pl. 17, 52, 59, 82
Badianus (C-B fol. 12r, 30v, 34r, 45v)=Begonia gracilis (Bye and Linares 2013;
de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Begonia
sp. (Furst 1995; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
olcacatzan/coçolmecatl=p. 212 Hernandez Rerum/p. 767 Hernandez
Historia=Smilax spinosa (S. mexicana) or S. pseudochina (Comas et al. 1995;
Díaz 1976) or S. cordifolia (Comas et al. 1995)
olcuahuitl=Castilla elastica (Díaz 1976)
olli/ulli/hulli/holli/ōlli (black gum)=pl. 53 Badianus (C-B. fol. 31r)=pl. 78 Badianus
(C-B Fol. 43v)=p. 61, 304 Sahagún=Castilla elastica (de Ávila Blomberg 2012;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Ocaranza 2011; Reko 1947)
ololiuhqui/ololiuqui=FC=Datura ceratocaula (Daunay et  al. 2008; Estrada Lugo
1989) or Datura meteloides (Estrada Lugo 1989; Safford 1920, p.  550) or
Turbina corymbosa (Rivea corymbosa) (Comas et al. 1995; Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1989; Furst 1995; Ortiz de Montellano 1990; Safford 1912; Schultes 1941,
1964; Wasson 1973, 1980) or Helenium mexicanum (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989)
ololtic=FC=Euphorbia seguieriana (E. campestris) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989) or Croton salutaris (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Euphorbia macropus (E. biformis) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ololticapitzalpatli=Priva grandiflora (P. tuberosa) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
275
olquauitl=FC=Castilla elastica (Díaz 1976)
omizochitl/omixochitl=p. 277 Hernandez Rerum=FC666, 715=Polianthus tuberosa
(P. gracilis) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
oquechpatli=Peperomia umbilicata (Díaz 1976)
oquichtli cocaxochitl=p. 155 Hernandez Rerum/p. 647 Hernandez
Historia=Tagetes sp.
otlatl=FC=Bambusa sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
oxotzin=Brosimum alicastrum (Díaz 1976)
oxte=Malpighia souzae (Díaz 1976)
oyametl/oiametl/oyamel=pl. 70 Badianus (C-B fol. 39v)=FC374=Abies religiosa
(de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Miranda
and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947; Standley 1920–1926:59)
ozote=Ipomoea murucoides (Díaz 1976; Standley 1920–1926:1205)
oztoam=Byrsonima crassifolia (Díaz 1976)
pac=Solanum lycopersicum (Lycopersicon esculentum) (Díaz 1976)
paccan=Solanum americanum (S. nigrum) (Díaz 1976)
pachiote=Apeiba tibourboju (Díaz 1976)
panxochitl=Lobelia laxiflora (Díaz 1976)
papaloquelite=Porophyllum coloratum (P. seemannii) (Díaz 1976 ; Estrada Lugo
1989) or P. tagetoides (Díaz 1976) or P. viridiflorum (Estrada Lugo 1989)
papaloquilitl/pāpālōquilitl (butterfly edible herb)=pl. 34, 46, 91, 99 Badianus (C-B
fol. 20v, 27v, 50r, 54r)=Porophyllum [viridiflorum] (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or
P. ruderale subsp. macrocephalum (Bye and Linares 2013) or Porophyllum sp.
(Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or P. coloratum (Guerra 1952)
papaloquilitl=FC480a=Porophyllum coloratum (P. seemannii) or Porophyllum spp.
(Pico and Nuez 2000b) or P. coloratum (Reko 1947) or P. coloratum (P. seemannii) or P. tagetoides (Díaz 1976)
patachtli/pataxte=Theobroma cacao, T. angustifolium, or T. bicolor (Dressler 1953)
pati=p. 275 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1049 Hernandez Historia=Yucca sp.?
patimetl/patayametl=FC=Agave sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
patlahuactzitzicaztli/patlāhua-c tzītzicāztli (wide/broad nettle)=pl. 85 Badianus
(C-B fol. 47r)=Tournefortia hirsutissima? (Reko 1947) or T. suffruticosa (Guerra
1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Wigandia [urens?] (de Ávila Blomberg 2012)
or Wigandia urens (W. caracasana) (Díaz 1976)
pauxochitl=Lobelia laxiflora (Díaz 1976)
peçotli=pl. 79 Badianus (C-B fol. 44r)=Pachycereus sp. (Guerra 1952)
pelon mexixquilitl=p. 161 Hernandez Rerum=Tropaeolum majus (Pico and Nuez
2000b)
pepetoaxin=Leucaena leucocephala (L. glauca) (Díaz 1976)
petlatollin/petatolli=FC642=Typha latifolia (Zepeda and White 2008) or Cyperus
sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
petzapatli=?
petzicatl=FC=Chamissoa altissima (Estrada Lugo 1989)
peyotl/peyote=FC517=Lophophora williamsii (del Pozo 1966; Estrada Lugo 1989)
phehuame=Aristolochia sp.? (Ocaranza 2011)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
276
piçietl/picietl/pycietl/piciete/piecete/pycicti/pītz-yetl (little fragrant tobacco or
tobacco perfume)=pl. 54, 82 Badianus (C-B fol. 31v, 45v)=p. 173 Hernandez
Rerum/p. 246 Hernandez Historia=cultivated Nicotiana rustica (Comas et  al.
1995; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953; Daunay et al. 2008;
Estrada Lugo 1989; Furst 1995; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or N. tabacum (N.
mexicana) (Comas et al. 1995; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Ocaranza 2011)
piltzin tecouhxochitl chiyaua (greasy flower of the child-lord)=p. 62 Badianus (C-B
fol. 35v)=Tagetes sp.?
piltzintecouhxochitl chiyaua/pil-tzin-tēuc-xōchitl (flower of the child-lord)=p. 62,
65, 67 Badianus (C-B fol. 35v, 37r, 38r)=Lantana camara (de Ávila Blomberg
2012; Díaz 1976; Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Zinnia pauciflora (Díaz 1976) or Bonellia macrocarpa
subsp. macrocarpa (Jacquinia aurantiaca) (Guerra 1952)
pinahuihuiztli=Mimosa sensitiva (Díaz 1976)
pioa=FC=Ananas comosus (A. sativus) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
pipilolxochitl=Lobelia laxiflora (Díaz 1976)
pipiloxihuitl=Cestrum nocturnum (Díaz 1976)
pipiloxochitl=Lobelia laxiflora (Díaz 1976)
pipitzahuac/pipitzahoa/pipitzauac=FC520=Acourtia humboldtii (Perezia adnata)
(Comas et al. 1995; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Ortiz de Montellano 1975,
1990) or A. fruticosa (Perezia fruticosa)? (Comas et al. 1995; Ocaranza 2011) or
Eupatorium sessilifolium (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Polygala verticillata (Díaz 1976) or A. cuernavacana (Perezia cuernavacana) (Estrada Lugo
1989)
pita=FC=Agave fourcroydes or A. sisalana (Estrada Lugo 1989)
pitzauac=Indigofera suffruticosa (I. anil) (Díaz 1976)
pocayo=p.398 Hernandez Rerum=Smilax sp.?
pochotl/pochote=FC380=Ceiba pentandra (Eriodendron occidentale) (Díaz 1976;
Estrada Lugo 1989) or Pseudobombax ellipticum (Bombax ellipticum) (Díaz 1976)
pom=Protium copal (Dressler 1953)
popoloquolite=Porophyllum ruderale subsp. macrocephalum (P. macrocephalum)
(Díaz 1976)
popoyauh=FC=Raphanus raphanistrum (Estrada Lugo 1989)
popoyauhquilitl=p. 397 Hernandez Rerum/p. 240 Hernandez Historia=Brassicaceae?
potonxihuite=Cestrum dumetorum (Díaz 1976)
poxahoac=Euphorbia seguieriana (E. campestris) (Díaz 1976)
poçahualizxiuhtontli/pozahualizxiuhto[n]tli (insignificant little herb for
swellings)=pl. 110 Badianus (C-B fol. 59v)=Hieracium sp. (Linares and Bye
2013) or Echeandia sp.(Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
pozaualizpatli=FC=Croton cortesianus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
pozual=Euphorbia cortesianus (Díaz 1976)
puchotl=FC=Bombax ceiba (Estrada Lugo 1989)
quachichil=Loeselia mexicana (L. coccinea) (Díaz 1976)
quachtlacalhuaztli/quachilacalhoaztli=FC564=Mentzelia hispida (Díaz 1976) or
Phaseolus sp.?
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
277
quahayohuachtli=Cassia grandis (Comas et al. 1995) or Jatropha curcas (Comas
et al. 1995)
quahizquixochitl=Cordia elaeagnoides (Díaz 1976)
quametl=p. 273 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1052 Hernandez Historia=Agave sp.?
quamiauatl/quamiahoatl=p. 258 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1034 Hernandez
Historia=Huperzia orizabae? or Huperzia dichotoma (Lyocopodium dichotomum) (de Batres et al. 2012)
quamochitl=FC=Pithecellobium dulce (Díaz 1976; Ortiz de Montellano 1975,
1990)
quanacaquilitl (edible herb of the fowls)=FC=Sonchus oleraceus (Estrada Lugo
1987 in Picó and Nuez 2000a)
quantlapatzitzintl=Senecio toluccanus (Díaz 1976)
quapatlachtli=FC=Theobroma bicolor (Estrada Lugo 1989)
quapinolli=Hymenaea courbaril (Díaz 1976)
quapipillolxochitl=Lonicera pilosa (Díaz 1976)
quapopoltzin/quaupopoltzin=FC571=Piqueria trinervia (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989)
quappachcintli=FC=Zea mays (Estrada Lugo 1989)
quappoquietl (woody smoking-cane)=pl. 62 Badianus (C-B fol. 35v)=Schkuhria sp.
(Guerra 1952)
quaquauhtzontic/quaquaunton=p. 250 Hernandez Rerum/p. 131,132 Hernandez
Historia=Matelea reticulata (Gonolobus reticulatus) (Díaz 1976)
quauchtlacalhuatztli=Mentzelia hispida (Díaz 1976)
quauhalahuac/cuauh-alāhua-c (slippery [plant] of the forest)=pl. 106, 109 Badianus
(C-B fol. 57v, 59r)=Heliocarpus sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Bartlettina
sordida (Eupatorium sordidum) (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Heliocarpus terebinthinaceus (Grewia terebinthinacea, H. reticulatus) (Díaz 1976; Linares and
Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
quauhayacachtli=Lycianthes somniculenta (Solanum somniculentum) (Díaz 1976)
quauhayohuachtli=p. 173 Hernandez Rerum/p. 173 Hernandez Historia=Jatropha
curcas (Díaz 1976)
quauhayohuachtli=p. 87 Hernandez Rerum/p. 176 Hernandez Historia=Cassia fistula (Comas et al. 1995; Díaz 1976)
quauhayohuachtli=Manihot esculenta (M. utilissima) (Díaz 1976)
quauhayotli=Parmentiera aculeata (Crescentia aculeata, P. edulis) (Díaz 1976)
quauhcacahoatl=Theobroma cacao (Díaz 1976)
quauhcamotl/quauhcamotli=FC428, 440=Manihot esculenta (M. dulcis, M. utilissima) (Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo 1989)
quauhchian=p. 399 Hernandez Rerum/p. 213 Hernandez Historia=Priva mexicana
(P. hispida) (Díaz 1976)
quauhchichicpatli=p. 400 Hernandez Rerum/p. 580 Hernandez Historia=Desmodium
sp.?
quauhchichioalli=Rhus terebinthifolia (Díaz 1976)
quauhchilli=Bocconia arborea or Capsicum frutescens (Díaz 1976)
quauhcoyloi=p. 401 Hernandez Rerum/p. 514 Hernandez Historia=Bactris mexicana?
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
278
quauheloquilitl=FC=Ageratina deltoidea (Eupatorium deltoideum) (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
quauhhuitzihtzilxochitl (hummingbird-flower of the forest)=pl. 69 Badianus (C-B
fol. 39r)=Loeselia mexicana (L. coccinea) (Díaz 1976; Linares and Bye 2013;
Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Cestrum sp. (Miranda and Valdés
1964) or Loeselia sp. (Guerra 1952)
quauhichcatl=FC=Bombax palmeri (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Ceiba pentandra
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
quauhizquiztli/quauhhizquiztli=p. 404 Hernandez Rerum/p. 124 Hernandez
Historia=Baccharis conferta (Díaz 1976)
quauhmecapatli=p. 290 Hernandez Rerum/p. 761 Hernandez Historia=Smilax
aristolochiaefolia?
quauhmecatl=p. 289 Hernandez Rerum/p. 763 Hernandez Historia=Serjania mexicana (Díaz 1976; Ocaranza 2011)
quauhpatlathli/quauhpatachtli/cacahoaquahuitl/cacaoapatli=pl. 89 Badianus (C-B
fol. 49r)=p. 80 Hernandez Rerum/p. 912, 991 Hernandez Historia=Theobroma
bicolor (Bye and Linares 1990) or Theobroma sp. (Furst 1995)
quauhtecomatl=Crescentia cujete or Amphitecna macrophylla (Crescentia macrophylla) (Díaz 1976)
quauhtepatli=FC=Rhus glabra (Estrada Lugo 1989)
quauhtepopopatli=Yucca aloifolia (Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Y. faxoniana (Y.
australis) (Díaz 1976)
quauhtepoztli/quauhtepuztli=FC=Buddleia sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Guibourtia
hymenaefolia (Copaifera hymenaeifolia) or Quercus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
[quauhtla] huitzquilitl/cuauhtlah huitzquilitl (thorny edible herb)=pl. 55, 73, 75
(C-B fol. 32r, 41r, 42r)=Cirsium sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or Cirsium ehrenbergii (Bye and Linares
2013; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
quauhtlatlatzin=Hura crepitans (Díaz 1976; Ocaranza 2011) or H. polyandra (Díaz
1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
quauhtlaxoxocoyolin/cuauhtlah xōxocoyōlin (acid plant of the forest)=pl. 9, 32
Badianus (C-B fol. 8r 19v)=Begonia gracilis (Bye and Linares 2013; de Ávila
Blomberg 2012; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Begonia sp. (Guerra 1952)
quauhtla xoxocoyalin/cuauhtlah xōxocoyōlin (wild acid plant)=pl. 32 Badianus
(C-B fol. 19v)=FC=Oxalis tetraphylla (Bye and Linares 2013; Miranda and
Valdés 1964) or O. corniculata (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Estrada Lugo 1987 in
Picó and Nuez 2000a) or Begonia sp. (Reko 1947) or O. herdandezii (Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
quauhtlaxoxocoyalin (wild acid plant)=p. 474 Hernandez=Oxalis latifolia?
quauhtlaxoxocoyalin (wild acid plant)=Oxalis acetosella (O. americana) (Díaz 1976)
quauhtlepatli=p. 67 Hernandez Rerum/p. 183 Hernandez Historia=Euphorbia
calyculata (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010)
quauhtlepatli=p. 122 Hernandez Rerum/p. 185 Hernandez Historia=?
quauhtlepatli=p. 122 Hernandez Rerum/p. 186 Hernandez Historia=Lippia alba
(L. geminata) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
279
quauhtzahuatl=Ipomoea arborescens (Convolvulus arborescens)? (Ocaranza 2011)
quauhtzapotl=FC=Annona cherimola (Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953) or Psidium guajava (Díaz 1976) or Ternstroemia tepezapote (Díaz 1976)
quauhtzontic=Gonolobus prostratus (Díaz 1976)
quauhtzitzicaztli/cuauhtzitzicaztli/cuauhtzītzicāztli (forest nettle)=p. 85 Badianus
(C-B fol. 47r)=Urera baccifera (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952; Reko
1947) or Urera caracasana (Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Urtica sp.?
quauhuayohuachtli=Jatropha curcas (Díaz 1976)
quauhxicalli=Crescentia cujete (Díaz 1976)
quauhxilotl=Parmentiera aculeata (Crescentia aculeata, P. edulis) (Díaz 1976)
quauhxiotl=Bursera fagaroides (Elaphrium fagaroides, E. odoratum) or
Pseudosmodingium andrieuxii or P. perniciosum (Díaz 1976)
quauhxiyotl/quauhxiotl (wild itch)=p. 81 Badianus (C-B Vol. 45r)=p. 90, 406
Hernandez Rerum/p. 549 Hernandez Historia=Pseudosmodingium perniciosum
or Parmentiera aculeata (P. edulis)? (Reko 1947) or Bursera lancifolia or B.
longipes (Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Bursera sp. (Guerra 1952)
quauhxiuhtic=FC=Bursera multijuga or B. fagaroides (Díaz 1976; Reko 1947) or
Bursera multijuga (Elaphrium multijugum) or B. fagaroides (E. odoratum)
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
quauhxochitl=FC=Plumeria rubra (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
quauhxoxocoyli=FC478ab=Oxalis frutescens subsp. angustifolia (O. angustifolia)
or O. corniculata (Estrada Lugo 1989)
quauhyaya[h]ual (vine-rings of the forest)=pl. 81, 95 Badianus (C-B fol. 45r,
52r)=Smilax sp. (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Lycianthes sp. (Linares and Bye
2013) or Solanaceae?
quauhyetl=p. 403 Hernandez=wild Nicotiana rustica (Daunay et  al. 2008) or N.
tabacum (Díaz 1976)
quahuitl/quauhyyauhtli/yyauhtli (forest/to incense)=pl. 65, 70, 88, 91, 92, 95, 110
Badianus (C-B fol. 37r, 39v, 48v, 50r, 50v, 52r, 59v)=FC508a, 628=p. 160
Hernandez Rerum/p. 969 Hernandez Historia=p. 288 Sahagún=Tagetes lucida
(Linares and Bye 2013; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Chrysactinia mexicana
(Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
quauhyzquixochitl (wild popcorn flower)=pl. 77 Badianus (C-B fol. 43r)=Bourreria
huanita (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Cordia elaeagnoides (Miranda and
Valdés 1964)
quauitzquilitl (headed & prickly thistle)=FC=Cirsium sp. (Estrada Lugo 1987 in
Picó and Nuez 2000a)
quaulinecapatli=Smilax aristolochiifolia (Díaz 1976)
quaumaychuachilli=Jatropha curcas (Díaz 1976)
quaumecapatl=Smilax aristolochiifolia (Díaz 1976)
quautecomatl=Crescentia alata (Díaz 1976)
quauxitol=Parmentiera aculeata (P. edulis) (Dressler 1953)
quauxiyotl=Bursera lancifolia or B. longipes (Terebinthus longipes) (Díaz 1976)
queppachcintli=Zea mays (Rivera Morales 1941)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
280
quequexqui/quequixquic=FC=Colocasia antiuquorum (Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Xanthosoma violaceum or X. robustum or Xanthosma sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
quetzalaylin (precious ylin)=pl. 53, 54, 116 (C-B fol. 31r, 31v, 62v)=?
quetzalhatzonyatl/quetzal-atzonyatl (plume-like atzonyatl)=pl. 94 Badianius (C-B
fol. 51v)=Barkleyanthus salicifolius (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Linares and Bye
2013) or Senecio salignus (Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
quetzala[h]uexotl/quetzalhuexotl/quetzalauexotl/quetzalāhuexōtl (precious willow
water)=pl. 106 Badianus (C-B fol. 57v)=FC386, 578=Salix lasiolepis (de Ávila
Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Ortiz de Montellano 1990;
Reko 1947) or Salix paradoxa (Linares and Bye 2013) or Salix sp. (Guerra 1952;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
quetzalichtli=p. 275 Hernandez Rerum=Agave sp.?
quetzalmizquitl (precious mesquite)=FC592=pl. 62, 89 Badianus (C-B fol. 35v,
49r)=Prosopis chilensis (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Farfán and Elferink 2010;
Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Parkinsonia aculeata (Díaz 1976; Miranda and
Valdés 1964) or Prosopis laevigata (Linares and Bye 2013; Valdés Gutiérrez
et al. 1992) or Prosopis pubescens or Prosopis sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
quetzalotlatl=FC=Bambusa sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
quetzalxoxouh capahtli/quetzalxoxouhqui (precious blue/green remedy)=pl. 43, 65
Badianus (C-B fol. 26r, 37r)=Monnina sp. cf. M. salicifolia or Turbina corymbosa (Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
quetzalylin/quetzalytzlin/quetzalīlīn (precious alder)=pl. 69, 70, 83, 89, 115 (C-B
fol. 39r, 39v, 46r, 49r, 62r)=Alnus sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952;
Reko 1947;Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or A. acuminata subsp. arguta (Miranda
and Valdés 1964) or A. jorullensis (Linares and Bye 2013)
queyauhquilitl=Heliotropium curassavicum (Díaz 1976)
quilamolli=Dioscorea convolvulacea or Microsechium palmatum (M. helleri)
(Díaz 1976)
quilauacatl=FC=Persea sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
quiltonilli=FC464b=Amaranthus hypochondriacus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
quimichpatli=FC456b=Buddleja sessiliflora (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Schoenocaulon
officinale (Sabadilla officinarum) (Díaz 1976 ; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Roldana
ehrenbergiana (Senecio canicidus) (Díaz 1976) or Veratrum sp. (Altamirano
1896) or Anticlea frigida (Stenanthium frigidum) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
quimixpatle/quimixpatli=Buddleja sessiliflora (B. verticillata) (Díaz 1976)
sacatlaxcalli=Cuscuta umbellata (Díaz 1976)
sasafras=p. 61 Hernandez Rerum/p. 293 Hernandez Historia=Bursera graveolens
or Elaphrium pubescens or Sassafras albidum (S. officinalis) (Díaz 1976)
sinicuiche/sinicuichi/sinicuilche=Heimia salicifolia (Díaz 1976; Wasson 1973, 1980)
suchilcahue=Plumeria rubra (P. acutifolia) (Díaz 1976)
tacanalquiltic=FC=Artemisia ludoviciana subsp. redolens (A. redolens) (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
tacopaste/tacopatle/tacopaxtle=Aristolochia anguicida (A. mexicana) or
Aristolochia odoratissima (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
281
talayote=Gonolobus erianthus (Díaz 1976)
tamalayote/tamalayotl/tamalayotli=Cucurbita maxima (Díaz 1976)
taman=Gossypium hirsutum (G. schottii) (Díaz 1976)
tamatli=p. 118 Hernandez Rerum/p. 641 Hernandez Historia=?
tancazche=Zanthoxylum fagara (Díaz 1976)
tapate=Datura stramonium (Díaz 1976)
tatlauhcapatli=Geranium carolinianum (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
tchomechichi=Solanum americanum (S. nigrum)? (Ocaranza 2011)
teamoxtli (stone moss)=pl. 7, 29, 30, 58, 63, 80, 90, 91, 114 Badianus (C-B. fol. 7r,
18r, 18v, 33v, 36r, 44v, 49v, 50r, 61v)=bryophyte (Guerra 1952)
teachpaoaztli=Oenothera laciniata (Díaz 1976)
tecpatli/tecpalotl=FC=Manfreda scabra (Agave saponaria) or Iostephane heterophylla (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tecochitixihuitl (stone sleep herb)=pl. 76 Badianus (C-B fol. 42v)=Boccconia sp.?
(Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
tecolonochnopalli=FC=Opuntia streptacantha (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tecomahaca=p. 55 Hernandez Rerum/p. 554 Hernandez Historia=Bursera tecomaca
(Elaphrium tecomaca) or Protium heptaphyllum (Díaz 1976)
tecomalyyac=Protium heptaphyllum (Díaz 1976)
tecomasuchil=Cochlospermum vitifolium (Díaz 1976)
tecomate/tecomatl=Crescentia alata or C. cujete (Díaz 1976)
tecomaxochitl=FC511=p. 408 Hernandez Rerum/p. 443 Hernandez Historia=Datura
sp. (Daunay et al. 2008) or Solandra maxima (Datura maxima, S. nitida) (Díaz
1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Elferink et al. 1994; Zepeda and White 2008)
or Solandra guerrerensis or Solandra brevicalyx (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
or Solandra maxima (S. hartwegii) (Safford 1920, p.  560) or Brugmansia
arborea (Datura arborea) or Datura stramonium (Díaz 1976) or Amphitecna
macrophylla (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Cochlospermum vitifolium (Maximilianea
vitifolia) or Solandra grandiflora or Datura sp. or Swartzia guttata (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
tecomitl=FC=Mammillaria polythele (M. tetracantha) or M. dolichacantha (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
teçonpahtli (remedy that grows on red porous volcanic rock)=pl. 10 Badianus (C-B
vol. 8v)=Asclepias linaria (Bye and Linares 2013; Guerra 1952; Valdés Gutiérrez
et al. 1992; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
tecopal/tecoaplli=Bursera copallifera (B. jorullensis) or Rhus saxatilis (Díaz
1976)
teçontzapotl=FC=Manilkara zapota (Calocarpum mammosum, Lucuma mammosa)
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
tecopalli quahuitl/tecopalquahuitl=p. 47 Hernandez Rerum/p. 535 Hernandez
Historia=Protium copal (Díaz 1976) or Bursera sp.?
tecopalquanhuitl pitzahoac=Bursera bipinnata (Díaz 1976)
tecopal quahuitl tepotztlani/tocopalquahuitl=p. 49 Hernandez Rerum/p. 537
Hernandez Historia=Bursera sp.?
tecote=Crescentia alata (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
282
tecpatli (medicine used for broken bones)=pl. 41 Badianus (C-B fol. 25r)=p. 191
Hernandez Rerum=Smallanthus sp.? or Helianthus sp.? (Altamirano 1896) or
Asteraceae (Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Datura sp. (Guerra 1952)
tecuampatli=Marsdenia zimapanica (Díaz 1976)
tecuitlatl (excreta of stone)=Spirulina maxima (S. geitlerii) (Ortiz de Montellano
1990) or Spirulina sp. (Farrar 1966)
tehuistle/tehuitzli/tehuxtle/tehuztle=Sapindus saponaria (Díaz 1976)
temahuiztiliquauitl (people-honoring tree)=pl. 68, 69 (C-B fol. 38v,
39r)=Melastomataceae (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
temamatlatzin (shine with many leaves/stone shining with leaves)=pl. 7, 36
Badianus (C-B fol. 7r, 21v)=bryophyte (Guerra 1952)
temecatl=Cissus tiliacea (Vitis tiliacea) (Díaz 1976; Ocaranza 2011) or Ipomoea
emetica or I. hederifolia (Díaz 1976)
temecatl expurgante/temecatl purgante=p. 305 Hernandez Rerum/p. 775 Hernandez
Historia=Ipomoea hederifolia?
temecatl yauhtepecensi=p. 200 Hernandez Rerum/p. 777 Hernandez Historia=?
temeicaxihuitl/temecaxihuitl=p. 410 Hernandez Rerum/p. 778 Hernandez Historia=?
tememetla/temēmetla/tememetlatl (gizzard)=pl. 38 Badianus (C-B fol.
22v)=FC507a=Echeveria fulgens (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Estrada Lugo 1989;
Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or E. gibbiflora (Bye and Linares 2013; Díaz 1976;
Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Echeveria sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
temetl=FC=Agave sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tempate=Jatropha curcas (Díaz 1976)
tempixque=Pouteria campechiana (Vitellaria sphaerocarpa) (Díaz 1976)
tempixquiztli=Randia aculeata (R. mitis) (Díaz 1976)
tempixtle=Sideroxylon palmeri (Bumelia laetevirens) or Pouteria campechiana
(Vitellaria sphaerocarpa) or Sideroxylon persimile subsp. subsessiliflorum
(Bumelia subsessiliflora) (Díaz 1976)
tempizquixtli=Sideroxylon palmeri (Bumelia laetevirens) or Sideroxylon persimile
subsp. subsessiliflorum (Bumelia subsessiliflora) (Díaz 1976)
tenamaz-nanapoloa (carrying triplets)/tenamazton/tlalamatl=p. 129 Hernandez
Rerum=Scutellaria mexicana (Salazaria mexicana) (Tucker and Janick 2016)
tencuanete/tenauanete=Euphorbia calyculata (Díaz 1976)
tenochitli=Opuntia ficus-indica (Díaz 1976)
tenopalli=FC=Discocactus sp. (Epiphyllum sp.) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tenpachoaztli=Selaginella sellowii (S. rupestris) (Díaz 1976)
tentzonxochitl=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (Díaz 1976; Farfán and
Elferink 2010) or Bauhinia racemosa (Díaz 1976)
teocaltzincense=Caphalanthus occidentalis (Díaz 1976)
teocomitl=FC754a=Mammillaria polythele (M. tetracantha) (Díaz 1976 ) or
Echinocactus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Ferocactus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
teocotl=FC=Pinus teocote (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
teocuahuitl=Cedrela sp. (Altamirano 1896)
teoezquauitl/teōezcuahuitl (sacred blood tree)=pl. 68 Badianus (C-B fol.
38v)=Croton [draco] sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
283
Rauvolfia sp. (Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Mammea americana (Guerra
1952)
teohamatl/teoamatl (sacred paper plant)=pl. 77, 78, 82 Badianus (C-B fol. 43r, 43v,
45v)=Agave sp. (Spirulina sp.) (Farrar 1966; Reko 1947)
teometl=FC524=Agave atrovirens (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or A. potatorum
(Díaz 1976) or A. vivipata? (Ocaranza 2011)
teonacaztli/ueinacaztli (sacred ear)=FC420, 686=p. 237 Sahagún=Cymbopetalum
penduliflorum (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Chiranthodendron pentadactylon (Estrada Lugo 1989)
teonanacatl=Psilocybe aztecorum or P. mexicana (Farfán and Elferink 2010),
P. zapotecorum, P. semperviva, or Panaeolus sphinctrinus (Díaz 1976; Schultes
1940) or Salvia divinorum (del Pozo 1966) or Hylocereus undatus (Díaz 1976)
or Inocybe sp. or Panaeolus sp. or Psathyrella sp. or Psilocybe sp. or Stropharia
sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
teonochtli/teō-nōchtli (sacred cactus)=pl. 28 Badianus (C-B fol. 17v)=Pachycereus
weberi (Reko 1947) or Stenocereus sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992; Zepeda and White 2008) or Isolatocereus dumortieri (Bye
and Linares 2013) or Hylocereus undatus (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Pachycereus
sp. (Guerra 1952)
teopochotl=FC743=Bombax sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Ceiba sp. (Estrada
Lugo,1989)
teouaxin=FC=Lysiloma acapulcense (Estrada Lugo 1989)
teoyztaquilitl (sacred salt edible herb)=pl. 31, 46, 51, 75, 79 Badianus (C-B fol. 19r,
27v, 30r, 42r, 44r)=Brassicaceae (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko
1947)
tepachtli=Selaginella sellowii (S. rupestris) (Díaz 1976)
tepapaquiltiqu[h]auitl (tree making people happy)=pl. 69, 70, 91 Badianus (C-B
fol. 39r, 39v, 50r)=Hibiscus sp. (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
tepaquiltixiuhtontli (insignificant little herb making people happy)=pl. 67 Badianus
(C-B fol. 38r)=Hibiscus sp. (Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Ipomoea
cristulata (Linares and Bye 2013) or Pavonia schiedeana (Malache rosea)
(Guerra 1952)
teparisirangua=Commelina tuberosa (Díaz 1976)
tepate=Datura stramonium (Díaz 1976)
tepepapaloquilitl/tepēpālōquilitl (butterfly edible herb of the mountains)=pl. 103
Badianus (C-B fol. 56r)=Porophyllum sp.? (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Miranda
and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Porophyllum punctatum
(Linares and Bye 2013)
tepeacxoyatl=Asclepias verticillata (Díaz 1976)
tepeamalacotl=FC545=Solidago sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tepeamatl/texcalamatl (cliff yellow paper)=p. 81–82 Hernandez Rerum=Ficus nymphaeifolia (Díaz 1976) or Populus sp.
tepecenpoal xochitl=p. 156 Hernandez Rerum/p. 652 Hernandez Historia=Tagetes
sp.?
tepechayotli=Selaginella pallescens (S. cuspidata) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
284
tepechian/tepechien/tepē-chian (mountain chia)=pl. 32, 61, 62, 63, 65, 76, 81
Badianus (C-B fol. 19v, 35r, 35v, 36r, 37r, 42v, 45r)=Salvia [hispanica] (de Ávila
Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952) or Verbena sp. (Reko 1947) or Salvia occidentalis
(Díaz 1976) or Salvia sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
tepecoacuilco=Galphimia paniculata (G. humboldtiana) (Díaz 1976)
tepecuilote=Cornus excelsa (Díaz 1976)
tepeguaje=Lysiloma acapulcense (Díaz 1976)
tepehoaxin=Senna pallida (Cassia acapulcensis) or Lysiloma acapulcense (Díaz
1976)
tepehoila capitzxochitl=p. 211 Hernandez Rerum=Ipomoea sp.?
tepehuaje=Leucaena pulverulenta or Lysiloma acapulcense (Díaz 1976)
tepeizquitl=Arctostaphylos pungens (Díaz 1976)
tepejilote=Chamaedorea elatior or C. tepejilote (Díaz 1976)
tepejiloxochitl=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C. anomala) (Díaz 1976)
tepemizquitl=Lysiloma acapulcense (Díaz 1976)
tepenexcomitl=p. 410 Hernandez Rerum/p. 939 Hernandez Historia=Ferocactus
recurvus (F. latispinus)
tepeoaxin=Lysiloma acapulcense (Díaz 1976)
tepepapaloquilitl (mountain butterfly edible plant)=pl. 103 Badianus (C-B fol.
56r)=Porophyllum sp. (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
tepesquitl=Arctostaphylos pungens (Díaz 1976)
tepetlachichicx xiuhuitl/tepetlachichicxihuitl=p. 192 Hernandez Rerum/p. 572
Hernandez Historia=?
tepetomatl=FC383, 585=Arctostaphylos tomentosa (Díaz 1976; Estada Lugo 1989;
Ocaranza 2011) or Physalis sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tepetuage=Cassia acapulcensis (Díaz 1976)
tepexiloxochitl=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C. anomala, C. grandiflora)
(Díaz 1976)
tepexonacatl=FC=Allium sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tepeyauhtli/ yauhtli/yyauhtli montes=p. 167 Hernandez Rerum/p. 971 Hernandez
Historia=Chromolaena pulchella (Eupatorium pulchellum)?
tepeylin (mountain alder)=pl. 70 Badianus (C-B fol. 39v)=Alnus sp. (Guerra 1952;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947)
tepezapote=Phytolacca dioica or Ternstroemia tepezapote (Díaz 1976)
tepezentli/tepececentli=p. 223 Hernandez Rerum/p. 867 Hernandez
Historia=Apocynaceae?
tepezquite=Arctostaphylos pungens (Díaz 1976)
tepicquilitl (edible herb found among the stones)=FC471b=?
tepitoton teamoxtli (small stone mosses)=pl. 30 Badianus (C-B fol. 18v)=bryophyte
(Guerra 1952)
tepixiloxochitl=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
tepepote/tepepotl/tepepotli=Baccharis conferta or B. salicina (B. glutinosa) or B.
multiflora or Ephedra aspera or E. trifurca (Díaz 1976)
tepoyan=Ehretia anacua (E. scabra) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
285
tepozan=pl. 81 Badianus (C-B fol. 45r)=Buddleja sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or
B. americana or B. cordata or Haplophyton cimicidum (Díaz 1976)
tepoztlanensi=p. 31 Hernandez Rerum/p. 28 Hernandez Historia=Dahlia sp. aff. D.
coccinea?
tequammaytl/tequammaitl/tegnammaytl (man-eater’s hand)=pl. 10 Badianus (C-B
fol. 8v)=Smilax spinosa (Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or S. moranensis
(Díaz 1976) or Dioscorea sp. (Bye and Linares 2013; Guerra 1952; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
tequa niytzoncal=p. 411 Hernandez Rerum=Vittaria sp.?
tequequetzal=FC656=Selaginella lepidophylla (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Adiantum sp. or S. pilifera (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tequixquiçacatl/tequizquizacatl (soda grass)=pl. 19 Badianus (C-B fol.
13r)=Distichlis spicata (Bye and Linares 2013; Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Sporolobus sp. (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Reko 1947)
teshuate=Conostegia xalapensis (Díaz 1976)
tetezhuatic/tē-tezhua-tic (smooth or polished)=pl. 40 Badianus (C-B fol.
24v)=Conostegia sp. or Miconia sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952;
Reko 1947) or Conostegia xalapensis (Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
tetlatia=Toxicodendron radicans (Díaz 1976; Ocaranza 2011)
tetzapotl (stone sapote)=pl. 57, 58 Badianus (C-B fol. 33r, 33v)=Manilkara zapota
or Annona squamosa (Reko 1947) or Pouteria sapota (Linares and Bye 2013;
Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Annona squamosa (Guerra 1952)
tetzitzicaztli/te-tzīzicāztli (stone nettle)=pl. 85 Badianus (C-B fol. 47r)=Jatropha
sp.? (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Cnidoscolus multilobus? (de Ávila Blomberg
2012) or Cnidoscolus sp. (Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
tetzitzilin (making a stone-like ringing noise)=pl. 94 Badianus (C-B fol.
51v)=Cucurbitaceae (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Microsechium palmatum (M.
helleri) (Linares and Bye 2013) or Cucurbita sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
tetzminohpalli/tetzminopalli (sedum nopal)=pl. 32 Badianus (C-B fol. 19v)=Pereskia
portulacifolia (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Crassulaceae (Miranda and Valdés
1964)
tetzmitl/tetzmetl/tetzmitic/tetetzmitic=pl. 19, 75, 79, 88, 90 Badianus (C-B fol. 13r,
42r, 44r, 48v, 49v)=FC496, 557, 754e=p. 171 Hernandez=Sedum dendroideum
(Bye and Linares 2013; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989;
Guerra 1952; Reko 1947; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
tetzmicochitl (flower of the tetzmitl)=pl. 10, 60 Badianus (C-B fol. 8v, 34v)=see
tetzmitl
tetzmolin/tetzmoli=FC654, 756=Quercus fusiformis or Quercus sp. (Estrada Lugo
1989)
teunacaztli=FC=Cymbopetalum penduliflorum (Estrada Lugo 1989)
texaltzapotl=Annona cherimola or A. squamosa (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
286
texcalamacoztli/texcalāma-coztli (yellow paper-tree of the boulders)=pl. 68
Badianus (C-B fol. 38v)=Populus sp. or Ficus sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or
Ficus petiolaris (Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
texcalamatichichic (bitter cliff paper)=pl. 78 Badianus (C-B fol. 43v)=Ficus petiolaris (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
texcalamatl=Ficus petiolaris (F. jaliscana) or F. nymphaeifolia (Díaz 1976)
texcalpachtli=Selaginella sellowii (S. rupestris) (Díaz 1976)
texhuatl=p. 413 Hernandez Rerum=Melastomataceae?
texixiuhtli=Heliotropium angiospermum (H. parviflorum) (Díaz 1976)
texiotl/texyotl/texiutl (stone rash)=pl. 38, 90 Badianus (C-B fol. 22v,
49v)=FC755a=Sedum dendroideum (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or S. oxypetalum (Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or S. bourgaei? (Guerra 1952;
Reko 1947) or Sedum praealtum subsp. parvifolium (Bye and Linares 2013;
Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
texocotl=FC=Crataegus gracilior (C. pubescens) (Dressler 1953) or Crataegus
mexicana (Altamirano 1896)
texochitl yamanqui/yamanquitexochitl (soft stone-flower)=pl. 64 Badianus (C-B
fol. 36v)=Selaginella sp. (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or S. lepidophylla (Díaz
1976; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
texocotl/texocutl=FC=Crataegus mexicana (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or C.
gracilior (C. pubescens) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
texoxochitl=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C. anomala, C. grandiflora)
(Díaz 1976)
texoxocoili/texoxocoytli (hard sorrel)=FC587=Oxalis sp. (Estrada Lugo 1987  in
Pico and Nuez 2000a; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Begonia gracilis (Farfán and
Elferink 2010)
teyacua=Chiranthodendron pentadactylon (Díaz 1976)
teyyayhtli=Asplenium trichomanes (Díaz 1976)
tezcapatli=Senecio praecox (Díaz 1976)
tezhaotl=Melastoma sp. (Altamirano 1896)
tezompotonic/”tzonpotonic”=p. 191 Hernandez Rerum/p. 135 Hernandez
Historia=Blumea viscosa (Conyza lyrata)
tezonpatli=Asclepias linaria (Díaz 1976; Ortiz de Montellano 1990; Reko 1947)
tezonzapotl/tezontzapote (lava sapote)=Manilkara zapota (Díaz 1976; Dressler
1953) or Mammea americana (Díaz 1976)
tezuatl/tezoatl=FC=Conostegia xalapensis or Miconia laevigata (Estrada Lugo
1989)
theometl=p. 274 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1046 Hernandez Historia=Agave atrovirens?
tianquiz=Alternanthera sessilis (A. repens) or Plumbago pulchella (Díaz 1976)
tianquizpepetla=Alternanthera sessilis (A. repens) (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink
2010) or A. pungens (Illecebrum achyrantha)? (Ocaranza 2011)
titilamatl=Pseudobombax ellipticum (Bombax ellipticum) (Díaz 1976)
tizexochitl=Plumeria rubra (P. acutifolia) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
287
tlacacahoatl=Arachis hypogaea (Díaz 1976)
tlacacamohtli/tlāca-camohtli (man tuber)=pl. 48, 79 Badianus (C-B fol. 28v,
44r)=Ipomoea sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés
Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or I. batatas (Bye and Linares 2013) or I. purga or
Operculina pteripes (O. alatipes) (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
tlacametl=p. 274 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1042 Hernandez Historia=FC=Agave atrovirens (Estrada Lugo 1989) or A. potatorum (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or A.
salmiana (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlacapolin=Gaultheria myrsinoides (Pernettya ciliata) (Díaz 1976)
tlacapulin=Rhamnus serrata (Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
tlacazolauacatl=FC=Persea sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlacehuiloni=Geranium hernandesii? (Ocaranza 2011)
tlaceoitli/tlaceuilli=FC=Indigofera suffruticosa (I. anil) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989)
tlachichinoa=Moussonia deppeana (Isoloma deppeanum, Kohleria deppeana) or
Tournefortia capitata or T. hirsutissima (Díaz 1976)
tlachichinoapatlahoac=p. 292 Hernandez Rerum/p. 366 Hernandez
Historia=Heliotropium angiospermum (H. parviflorum) (Díaz 1976)
tlachichinoapatlahoac=p. 292 Hernandez Rerum/p. 367 Hernandez
Historia=Tournefortia mexicana (Díaz 1976)
tlachichinoapatlahoac=p. 292 Hernandez Rerum/p. 368 Hernandez
Historia=Tournefortia volubilis (Díaz 1976)
tlachichinoa xiuitl=FC=Plumbago zeylanica (P. scandens) (Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Tournefortia hirsutissima (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlachichinol=Plumbago pulchella (Díaz 1976)
tlachichinole=Stevia linoides (Díaz 1976)
tlachicon=Curatella americana (Díaz 1976)
tlachinole=Croton draco or Urera caracasana (Díaz 1976)
tlachinoltetzmitl=FC754f=Moussonia deppeana (Kohleria deppeana) (Díaz 1976;
Estrada Lugo 1989) or Croton draco or Sedum sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlachipili=FC=Crotalaria sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlachpahuaztic=Polygala verticillata (Díaz 1976)
tlacoamatl/tlacametl (stalk plant)=pl. 53 Badianus (C-B fol. 31r)=p. 274, 884
Hernandez/p. 1042 Hernandez Historia=Agave sp.?
tlacoamatl (stalk paper)=pl. 53 Badianus (C-B fol. 31r)=Morus sp. (Guerra 1952;
Reko 1947) or Ehretia tinifolia or Morus celtidifolia (Díaz 1976) or Morus sp.
(Miranda and Valdés 1964)
tlacochich=Pseudognaphalium conoideum (Gnaphalium conoideum) (Díaz 1976)
tlacochichic=Pseudognaphalium canescens (Gnaphalium canescens) (Díaz 1976;
Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Blumea viscosa (Conyza canescens) or
Pseudognaphalium canescens (Gnaphalium conoideum) (Díaz 1976)
tlacoecapahtli/tlacohecapahtli/tlacoecapatli (shrubby wind-remedy)=pl. 88
Badianus (C-B fol. 48v)=Litsea glaucescens (Linares and Bye 2013) or Senna
occidentalis (Cassia occidentalis) (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Reko 1947)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
288
tlacoizquixochitl=Cordia alba (C. dentata) (Díaz 1976)
tlacopatli/tlacopatle=FC=Aristolochia sp. (Farfán and Elferink 2010) or A. anguicida (A. mexicana) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Ocaranza 2011) or A. subclausa (Díaz 1976) or Iostephane heterophylla or Viguiera excelsa (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
tlacopopotl/tepopotl (stem broom)=pl. 108 Badianus (C-B fol.
58v)=FC757a=Flaveria angustifolia (Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952;
Reko 1947) or Arundinella hispida (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Marina diffusa
(Dalea diffusa) (Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Schkuhria pinnata
(Linnares and Bye 2013) or Baccharis multiflora (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlacoxihuitl/tlacoxiutl=p. 416 Hernandez Rerum=FC550=Bocconia arborea
(Estrada Lugo 1989) or Bouvardia ternifolia (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlacoxilo[h]xochitl/tlacō-xīlō-xōchitl (shrubby maize-ear-flower)=pl. 33, 35, 78
Badianus (C-B. fol. 20r, 21r, 43v)=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C.
anomala, C. grandiflora) (Bye and Linares 2013; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz
1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
tlacoxiloxochitl=p. 104 Hernandez Rerum/p. 455, 456, 457 Hernandez
Historia=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C. anomala, C. grandiflora)
(Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Ortiz de Montellano 1990; Reko 1947)
tlacoxochitl=FC701b=Bouvardia ternifolia (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010;
Viesca and Aranda 1996) or Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C. anomala,
C. grandiflora) (Díaz 1976)
tlacoyzquixochitl/tlacoizquixochitl (shrubby popcorn-flower)=pl. 14, 30, 60, 70
Badianus (C-B fol. 10v, 18v, 34v, 39v)=Boraginaceae or Bourreria huanita or
Cordia alba (Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Cordia elaeagnoides
(Linares and Bye 2013) or Cordia alba (Guerra 1952)
tlacozazalic=FC=Bidens sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Fuchsia thymifolia (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
tlaelpatli/apitzalpatli=p. 285 Hernandez Rerum/p. 6 Hernandez Historia=Spermacoce
tenella (Díaz 1976) or Priva sp.?
tlahchinolpan yxuaxihuitl (herb that comes up in burned land)=pl. 41 Badianus
(C-B fol. 25r)=Poaceae (Guerra 1952) or Cyperaceae?
tlahçolpahtli/tlazolpatli/azcapan yxhuatlahcolpahtli (ill smelling medicine)=pl. 20,
76 Badianus (C-B fol. 13v, 42v)=Datura stramonium (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
or Datura sp. (Furst 1995)
tlahçoteoçacayl/tlahçolteoçacatl/tlahcolteocacatl /tlazolteozacatl (grass of
Tlahcolteotl)=pl. 75, 80 Badianus (C-B fol. 42r, 44v)=Sobralia macrantha
(Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or Tigridia violacea?
tlahcuilolquauitl/tla-hcuilō-l-cuahuitl (written tree/wood)=pl. 69 Badianus (C-B fol.
39r)=Dalbergia sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992), Fabaceae (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947), or D. brownei
(D. amerimnum) (Díaz 1976) or Haematoxylon brasiletto (Linares and Bye 2013)
tlahnextia xiuhtonli (little herb that shines)=pl. 29, 31 Badianus (C-B fol. 18r,
19r)=Eryngium carlinae (Bye and Linares 2013) or Eryngium sp. (Guerra 1952)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
289
tlahoelilocaquahuitl=p. 455 Hernandez Rerum/p. 555 Hernandez Historia=?
tla[h]tla[h]cotic/tlatlacotic (having many stems/sticks)=pl. 38, 45, 92, 94, 98
Badianus (C-B fol. 22v, 27r, 50v, 51v, 53v)=Bidens odorata (Bye and Linares
2013 ) or Bidens sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Baccharis brachylaenoides
var. ligustrina (Baccharis saligna) (Guerra 1952) or Brosimum alicastrum or
Zinnia sp. or Scabiosa fruticulosa
tlakatsitsintli=Cordyceps capitata (Díaz 1976)
tlalacxoyatl=p. 419 Hernandez Rerum/p. 42 Hernandez Historia=Asclepias linaria
(Díaz 1976; Ortiz de Montellano 1990) or A. tuberosa (Díaz 1976)
tlalahoacatl=p. 420 Hernandez Rerum/p. 90 Hernandez Historia=Tagetes coronopifolia (T. multifida) or Stevia linoides (Díaz 1976)
tlalahoehoetl=Selaginella sellowii (S. rupeastris) (Díaz 1976)
tlalalxixquilitl=Osmorhiza mexicana (Díaz 1976)
tlalamatl=FC572=p. 70 Hernandez Rerum/p. 261 Hernandez Historia=Desmodium
orbiculare or D. angustifolium (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlalamatl=p. 306 Hernandez Rerum/p. 264 Hernandez Historia=Desmodium orbiculare (Díaz 1976)
tlalamatl=p. 420 Hernandez Rerum=Capsicum sp.?
tlalantlacuitlapilli=Ipomoea jalapa (Batatas jalapa)? (Ocaranza 2011)
tlalaquequetzal=p. 194 Hernandez Rerum=Achillea millefolium?
tlalauhcapatli=Geranium mexicanum (Díaz 1976)
tlal[h]aueuetl/tlalhahuehuetl/tlalhuaueuetl (earth cypress)=pl. 8, 84, 86, 89, 113
Badianus (C-B fol. 7v, 46v, 47v, 49r, 61r)=Agastache mexicana (Cedronella
mexicana) (Bye and Linares 2013; Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye
2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or
Acalypha sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Verbena
sp. (Guerra 1952)
tlalayote/tlalayotic/tlalayotli/tlatlalayotli/tlalayotli/tlallayotli=FC488a,
544=Asclepias linaria (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Gonolobus erianthus or G. pedunculatus (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or G. nummularius (Díaz 1976) or G.
parviflorus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlalcacahoatl/tlalcacahuatl=Arachis hypogaea or Theobroma cacao (Díaz 1976)
tlalcacaloxochitl=FC671=Plumeria rubra (P. acutifolia) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989)
tlalcacahuatl chimalhuacani chalcensi/tlalcacahoatl chimalhuacan=p. 281
Hernandez Rerum/p. 919 Hernandez Historia=?
tlalcacapol/tlālcācapol (earth cherries)=pl. 89 Badianus (C-B fol. 49r)=Rhamnus
serrata? or Rhamnus sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Malpighia glabra (Guerra
1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or R. serrata (Díaz 1976) or R.
humboldtiana (Karwinskia humboldtiana) (Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013;
Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
tlalcacauatl/tlalcacahuatl/tlalcacahoatl=p. 253 Hernandez Rerum/p. 917
Hernandez Historia=FC495=Arachis hypogaea (Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo
1989; Farfán and Elferink 2010)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
290
tlalcapoli=FC658=Rhamnus humboldtiana (Karwinskia humboldtiana) (Estrada
Lugo 1989) or Rhamnus serrata (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlalcapolin/tlalcapulin=p. 230 Hernandez Rerum/p. 906 Hernandez
Historia=FC=Rhamnus humboldtiana (Karwinskia humboldtiana) (Standley
1920–1926:717) or R. serrata or Chimaphila umbellata (Díaz 1976) or
Gaultheria myrsinoides (Pernettya ciliata) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlalchamallin/tlalchamolin=p. 420 Hernandez Rerum/p. 928 Hernandez Historia=?
tlalchichinboaxihuitl=Tournefortia mexicana? (Ocaranza 2011)
tlalchichicpatli=p. 421 Hernandez Rerum/p. 579 Hernandez Historia=Desmodium
sp.?
tlalchichinoa patlahoal=p. 292 Hernandez Rerum=Solidago sp.
tlachichinole=Moussonia deppeana (Isoloma deppeanum, Kohleria deppeana)
(Díaz 1976)
tlachinole=Nesaea syphilitica (Heimia syphilitica) (Díaz 1976)
tlalchipili=FC551=Crotalaria sp. or Frasera albicaulis var. nitida (Swertia nitida)
(Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlacocol=Polygala verticillata (Díaz 1976)
tlalhecapa[h]tli (earth wind medicine)=pl. 65, 79, 92 Badianus (C-B fol. 37r, 44r,
50v)=Cassia sp.? (Guerra 1952)
tlacuilolquauitl=FC=Philodendron sagittifolium (P. sanguineum) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlalhuaxin (earth huaxin)=pl. 57 Badianus (C-B fol. 33r)=Mimosa sp. (Guerra 1952;
Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Mimosa aculeaticarpa (Mimosa aculeaticarpa var. biuncifera) (Linares and Bye 2013)
tlalhoaxin=Senna occidentalis (Cassia occidentalis) or Chamaecrista nictitans var.
mensalis (Cassia leptadenia) (Díaz 1976)
tlalixtli=Ceanothus caeruleus (Díaz 1976)
tlalizquitl=Cordia elaeagnoides (Díaz 1976)
tlallaala/tlaltzacutli=FC=p. 419 Hernandez Rerum/p. 381 Hernandez
Historia=Sphaeralcea angustifolia (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlallaalam=Sphaeralcea angustifolia (Malva angustifolia) (Díaz 1976)
tlallaala alia=p. 419 Hernandez Rerum/p. 382 Hernandez Historia=Malvastrum
spicatumi?
tlallantlacuacuitlapilli/tlallantlacacuitlapilli=p. 238 Hernandez Rerum/p. 726
Hernandez Historia=?
tlallantlacuacuitlapilli/tlallantlacacuitlapilli=p. 238 Hernandez Rerum/p. 727
Hernandez Historia=?
tlallantlacuacuitlapilli/tlallantlacacuitlapilli=p. 239 Hernandez Rerum/p. 728
Hernandez Historia=?
tlallantlacuacuitlapilli/tlallantlacacuitlapilli=p. 239 Hernandez Rerum/p. 729
Hernandez Historia=Marsdenia mexicana (Díaz 1976) or Gonolobus sp.?
tlallayotli=p. 201 Hernandez Rerum/p. 166 Hernandez Historia=Gonolobus nummularius or G. pedunculatus (Díaz 1976)
tlalmatzalin hocxotzincensi=p. 294 Hernandez Rerum=Brazoria arenaria?
tlalocopetate/tlalocopetatl=Coriaria ruscifolia subsp. microphylla (C. atropurpurea) (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
291
tlalocoxochitl=Drymaria ovata (Díaz 1976)
tlalmizquitl (earth mesquite)=pl. 40, 113 Badianus (C-B fol. 24v, 61r)=FC547=Dalea
foliolosa (Bye and Linares 2013) or Prosopis sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Prosopis
juliflora? or Hoffmannseggia glauca (H. densiflora) (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
or Dalea sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
tlalquequetzal/tlāl-quē-quetzal (earth plume-headdress)=pl. 39, 62, 78 Badianus
(C-B fol. 24r, 35v, 43v)=FC656=Achillea millefolium (Bye and Linares 2013; de
Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Farfán and Elferink 2010;
Guerra 1952; Ortiz de Montellano 1990; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et  al.
1992) or Adiantum trapeziforme? (Ocaranza 2011) or Pleopeltis macrocarpa
(Polypodium lanceolatum) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Adiantum sp.
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlaltzacuitli=Sphaeralcea angustifolia (Malva angustifolia) (Díaz 1976)
tlaltzilacayotli=p. 206 Hernandez Rerum/p. 164 Hernandez Historia=?
tlaltzitzicaztli=Urtica dioica (Díaz 1976)
tlalyetl/tlalietl/tlally yetl=FC=p. 423 Hernandez Rerum/p. 247 Hernandez
Historia=Erigeron glacialis (E. scaposus) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlalxiloxochitl=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
tlalyetl/tlalietl/tlalyetl =FC560, 658=Erigeron longipes (E. scaposus) (Díaz 1976)
or Cunila sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlamacatzcatzotl/tlamacazatzotl/tlamacazcacootl=Calliandra houstoniana var.
anomala (C. anomala, C. grandiflora) (Díaz 1976)
tlamacazqui ipapa=FC=Huperzia dichotoma (Lycopodium dichotomum) (Díaz
1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlamapaquelite=Piper sanctum (Díaz 1976)
tlamexcaltzin=Argemone mexicana or A. ochroleuca (Díaz 1976)
tlanchalagua=Zeltnera stricta (Erythraea stricta) (Díaz 1976)
tlanchichinole=Moussonia deppeana (Isoloma deppeanum, Kohleria deppeana)
(Díaz 1976)
tlanchichinolli=Plumbago zeylanica (P. scandens) (Díaz 1976)
tlanenpo[h]poloua xiuhtontli/xiuhtontli tlanenpopoloua/tlanempopolo hua xiuhtontli (little herb that squanders its fortune)=pl. 58, 88 Badianus (C-B fol. 33v,
48v)=Asclepias oenotheroides (A. longicornu) (Reko 1947) or Argemone
mexicana (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Asclepias sp. (Linares and Bye 2013;
Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Argemone sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
tlanepaquelite/tlanepaquelitl=Piper auritum or P. sanctum (Díaz 1976)
tlanextia qua[h]uitl/tlanexti quauitl (bright tree)=pl. 69, 75, 86 Badianus (C-B fol.
39r, 42r, 47v)=Iridaceae? or Amaryllidaceae?
tlanextiaxi(h)uitl=pl. 75, 80, 96, 116 Badianus (C-B fol. 42r, 44v, 53r, 62v)=Eryngium
sp. (Guerra 1952)
tlahnextia xiuhtontli/tlahnextia/tlanextia/tlahnextli/tlanextia xiuhtontli/tlanextiyxiuh (little herb that shines)=pl. 29, 31, 36, 54, 55, 82, 106 Badianus (C-B fol. 18r
19r, 21v, 31v, 32r, 45v, 57v)=Polygala sp. (Bye and Linares 2013; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Eryngium sp. (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez
et al. 1992) or Eryngium carlinae (Bye and Linares 2013)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
292
tlanoquizpatli/nextalpe=p. 178 Hernandez Rerum=Guilleminea densa or
Alternanthera sessilis (A. repens) (Bye and Linares 1990)
tlaolcapulin/tlaolcapuli=FC427=Prunus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlaolli=p. 242, 243 Hernandez Rerum/p. 874, 876 Hernandez Historia=Zea mays
(Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953)
tlapa/tlapatl=FC=Datura stramonium (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Furst 1995)
or Datura sp. (Guerra 1952) or Ricinus communis (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlapahtli/tlapahtil/tapatl=pl. 22, 89 Badianus (C-B fol. 14v, 49r)=p. 278 Hernandez
Rerum=FC450, 451=Datura stramonium (Daunay et  al. 2008; Díaz 1976;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Ocaranza 2011; Ortiz de Montellano 1990; Reko
1947; Safford 1920) or Datura sp. (Guerra 1952)
talpal=FC=Bourreria sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlapalachiyotl/tlapalāchiotl (paint annatto)=pl. 78 Badianus (C-B fol. 43v)=Bixa
orellana (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra
1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947)
tlapalcacauatl/tlapalcacahuatl/tlapalcacahoatl (red cacao)=pl. 68, 70 Badianus
(C-B fol. 38v, 39v)=Theobroma cacao (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976;
Furst 1995; Linares and Bye 2013; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko
1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
tlapalcoçatli coaxochitl=p. 156 Hernandez Rerum/p. 650 Hernandez
Historia=Tagetes patula?
tlapalezpatli=p. 91 Hernandez Rerum/p. 628 Hernandez Historia=FC=Croton gossypiifolius (C. sanguifluus) or Eysenhardtia polystachya (Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1989) or Fabaceae?
tlapalezquauitl=FC=Jatropha dioica (J. spathulata) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlapalizquixochitl=FC685c=Bourreria sp.?
tlapalnochnopalli=FC=Opuntia sp.?
tlapaloaxin=Leucaena pulverulenta (Díaz 1976)
tlapaltecacayatl=p. 155 Hernandez Rerum/p. 648 Hernandez Historia=Tagetes
patula
tlaquilin (frilled flower, primary name)=pl. 22, 83, 89 Badianus (C-B fol. 14v, 46r,
49r)=p. 279 Hernandez Rerum=Mirabilis jalapa (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz
1976; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Ortiz de Montellano 1990; Reko
1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Ipomoea stans (Bye and Linares 2013)
tlatlalamatic=p. 426 Hernandez Rerum/p. 266 Hernandez Historia=Cuphea angustifolia (Díaz 1976)
tlatlanquaye/tlā-tlancuā-yeh/tlatlancuaya (possessor of several knees)=pl. 8, 22,
34, 36, 50, 52, 54, 66, 80, 81, 82, 83 (C-B fol. 7v, 14v 20v, 21v, 29v, 30v, 31v,
37v, 44v, 45r, 45v, 46r)=FC588=Iresine calea (Bye and Linares 2013; de Ávila
Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Ortiz de
Montellano 1990) or Iresine diffusa (I. celosioides) (Díaz 1976) + pl. 73 Badianus
(C-B fol. 41r)=Peperomia galioides (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976;
Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
or Iresine sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
293
tlatlaolton (insignificant little maize kernels)=pl. 46, 66 Badianus (C-B fol. 27v,
37v)=Porophyllum coloratum (Bye and Linares 2013; Reko 1947) or Porophyllum
sp. (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
tlatlauhcapatli =FC491=Achimenes erecta (A. coccinea) or Geranium carolinianum (Díaz 1976)
tlatlauhquitezontzapotl=FC=Manilkara zapota (Achras sapota, Lucuma mammosa)
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlatlauhqui=FC=Ceiba pentandra or Geranium carolinianum (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlatlauhqui amoxtli (red amoxtilI)=pl. 59, 90 Badianus (C-B fol. 34r, 49v)=?
tlatlauhquipatli=FC=Justicia aff. aurea (Zepeda and White 2008) or Geranium
carolinianum or G. alchemilloides or G. mexicanum (Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Justicia sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlatoc nochtli/tla-tōc-nōchtli (planted cactus)=pl. 90 Badianus (C-B fol.
49v)=Opuntia [ficus-indica] (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or O. microdasys (Guerra
1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964), or O. streptacantha (Zepeda and White 2008)
or O. tomentosa (Linares and Bye 2013) or Opuntia sp. (Valdés Gutiérrez et al.
1992)
tlatocnocnopalli=FC=Opuntia sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlaltzacutli=FC=Sphaeralcea angustifolia?
tlatzan=Persea americana (P. gratissima) (Díaz 1976)
tlatzcan/tlazcantic (cypress, primary name)=pl. 86 Badianus (C-B fol. 47v)=FC373,
374=p. 98 Hernandez Rerum=Cupressus lusitanica var. benthamii (C. benthamii,
C. lindleyi) (plus Tillandsia usneoides) (Altamirano 1896; de Ávila Blomberg
2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947; Siméon 2010; Valdés Gutiérrez et  al.
1992) or Juniperus poblana (Cupressus thurifera) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlavepaquelite=Piper sanctum (Díaz 1976)
tlaxcapan=Ipomoea stans (Díaz 1976)
tlaxtloxochitl=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C. anomala, C. grandiflora)
(Díaz 1976)
tlayapaloni/tla-yapalō-ni (it habitually makes things black)=pl. 8, 86, 113 Badianus
(C-B fol. 7v, 47v, 61r)=Cissus verticillata (C. sicyoides) (Bye and Linares 2013;
de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Bromeliaceae (Guerra 1952)
tlayapaloni xiuhtontli (it habitually makes things black)=pl. 80 Badianus (C-B fol.
44v)=Plantago sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés
Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Bromeliaceae (Reko 1947) or Plantago australis
(Plantago australis subsp. hirtella) (Linares and Bye 2013) or Cissus verticillata
(C. sicyoides) (Guerra 1952)
tlazalxihuitl=Datura stramonium (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
tlazolpahtli=Datura stramonium or D. meteloides (Viesca and Aranda 1996)
tlepatli=p. 429 Hernandez Rerum/p. 189 Hernandez Historia=FC=Plumbago pulchella (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Ortiz de Montellano 1975, 1990)
or P. scandens (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
294
tlepatli=p. 102 Hernandez Rerum/p. 192 Hernandez Historia=Tournefortia hirsutissima or T. mexicana (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010)
tlaquilitl=Senna bacillaris (Cassia bacillaris) (Díaz 1976)
tletlemaitl=FC=Plumbago pulchella (Ortiz de Montellano 1975) or Euphorbia sp.
or Plumbago sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlilamatl=Ficus maxima (F. guadalajarana) or Ficus aurea (F. tecolutensis) (Díaz
1976)
tlilpoton=Eryngium carlinae (Díaz 1976)
tlilpotonqui=Eryngium beecheyanum (Díaz 1976)
tlilticchien=FC=Salvia hispanica (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tliltzapotl/tlilzapotl=p. 430 Hernandez Rerum/p. 270 Hernandez Historia=Diospyros
nigra (D. digyna, D. ebenaster) (Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953)
tlilxochitl/tlīl-xōchitl (black flower)=pl. 70, 104 Badianus (C-B fol. 39v,
56v)=FC668=p. 38 Hernandez Rerum=Vanilla planifolia (V. fragrans) (Comas
et al. 1995; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo
1989; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Ocaranza 2011; Ossenbach 2009; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or V.
mexicana (Epidendrum vanilla) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tlipoton=Eryngium foetidum (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
tocaxihuitl=Momordica charantia (Díaz 1976)
tochacaxihuitl=Cunila polyantha (C. longiflora) (Díaz 1976)
tochomitl=Moussonia deppeana (Isoloma deppeanum, Kohleria deppeana) (Díaz
1976)
tohmiyoxihuitl (fleece herb)=pl. 111 Badianus (C-B fol. 60r)=Packera bellidifolia
(Linares and Bye 2013)
to[h]toloctzin (small/revered one that repeatedly bows its head)=pl. 99 Badianus
(C-B fol. 54r)=Rubus pumilus (Linares and Bye 2013; Valdés Gutiérrez et al.
1992) or Cayaponia racemosa (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
toliaman=FC=Cyperus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tollon=Typha latifolia (Zepeda and White 2008)
tolmimilli=FC641=Cyperus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Schoenoplectus sp.
toloa/toloua/tolohua=pl. 22, 42 Badianus (C-B fol. 14v, 23v)=FC518=Datura sp.
(Daunay et al. 2008; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Datura stramonium (Estrada Lugo
1989)
toloatzin/toloazin=FC=Datura stramonium (Daunay et al. 2008; Díaz 1976; Farfán
and Elferink 2010)
toloatzin/toloache=FC=Datura wrightii (D. innoxia) (Farfán and Elferink 2010;
Safford 1920, p. 549)
tolohua xihuitl/tolouazihuitl/tōloā-xihuitl (herb that lowers its head)=pl. 41, 49, 57,
64, 65, 86 Badianus (C-B fol. 25r, 29r, 33r, 36v, 37r, 47v)=Datura/Brugmansia
sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Furst 1995; Reko 1947) or D. stramonium (Bye
and Linares 2013; Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al.
1992) or D. wrightii (D. meteloides) (Bye and Linares 2013; Díaz 1976; Guerra
1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
tolompatl/tolonpatl=Ipomoea purga (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
295
tolpatlactli/tōl-patlactli (wide rush)=pl. 29, 79 Badianus (C-B fol. 18r,
44r)=FC640=Typha sp. (Bye and Linares 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Typha angustifolia (Reko 1947) or T. latifolia (de Ávila
Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947; Zepeda and White 2008)
or Cyperus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tolpatle/tolpatli=Cyperus esculentus (Díaz 1976)
tomahuactlacopatli=p. 42 Hernandez Rerum/p. 789 Hernandez Historia=Aristolochia
sp.?
tomame=Physalis peruviana or P. pubescens (Díaz 1976)
tomate/tomates=FC=Solanum lycopersicum (Lycopersicon esculentum) or Physalis
ixocarpa (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or P. angulata or P. coztomatl or P.
pubescens (Daunay et al. 2008; Estrada Lugo 1989) or P. philadelphica (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
tomatl=Physalis ixocarpa (Dressler 1953; Daunay et al. 2008) or Solanum lycopersicum or Saracha sp. (Jenkins 1948) or Solanum lycopersicum (Díaz 1976)
tomazq’tl/tomazquitl (tomato popcorn)=pl. 69 Badianus (C-B fol. 39r)=FC=Arbutus
sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Arctostaphylos sp. (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or
Arctostaphylos pungens (Díaz 1976; Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés
1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
tomiyo xihuitl=Asteraceae (Reko 1947)
tompilillin=Melothria scabra (Díaz 1976)
tonacaxochitl (human-sustenance flower)=pl. 99 Badianus (C-B fol.
54r)=Amphilophium buccinatorium (Distictis buccinatoria) (Guerra 1952; Reko
1947; Zepeda and White 2008) or Amphilophium crucigerum (Pithecoctenium
echinatum) (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
tonalahuate=Persea americana (P. gratissima) (Díaz 1976)
tonalaxochitl=Oenothera laciniata (Díaz 1976)
tonalchichicaq (bitter edible herb of dry lands)=FC=Oenothera pubescens (Estrada
Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a)
tonalchichicaquilitl=FC=Oenothera laciniata (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Hieracium mexicanum (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tonalxihuitl (bitter edible herb of the summer)=FC660b=Stevia salicifolia (Estrada
Lugo 1989; Ortiz de Montellano 1990) or Veronica americana (Farfán and
Elferink 2010)
tonalxihuitl/tonalxiuitl=FC574=p. 251 Hernandez Rerum/p. 61 Hernandez
Historia=Cosmos diversifolius var. dahlioides (Bidens dahlioides) or Oenothera
laciniata or Senecio helodes (S. purpurascens) or Stevia salicifolia or Veronica
americana (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Oenothera rosea (O. rubra) or
O. laciniata (O. sinuata) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tonalxochitl ocoitucensi=p. 251 Hernandez Rerum/p. 59 Hernandez
Historia=Ludwigia sp.?
tonalxochitl (sun warmth flower/flower of the dry warm season)=pl. 67 Badianus
(C-B fol. 38r)=Mirabilis sp. (Guerra 1952) or Zinnia elegans?
tonalxochitl (sun warmth flower/flower of the dry warm
season)=FC670d=Amphilophium crucigerum (Pithecoctenium echinatum) (Díaz
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
296
1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Reko 1947) or Bletia coccinea (Estrada Lugo 1989;
Ocaranza 2011; Ossenbach 2009) or Prosthechea vitellina (Epidendrum vitellinum) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tonalxuitl=Stevia salicifolia (Díaz 1976)
tonatiuhyxiuh (sun herb)=pl. 41, 61, 75, 76, 79, 82, 87, 97, 116 (C-B fol. 25r, 35r,
42r, 42v, 44r, 45v, 48r, 53r, 62v)=Abutilon sp. (Guerra 1952)
tonatiuh yxiuh ahhauachcho (the sun’s dewy herb)=pl. 42, 51 Badianus (C-B fol.
25v, 30r)=Malvaceae or Brassicaceae (Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Abutilon sp.
or Malvaviscus sp. (Guerra 1952)
tonatiuh yxiuh pepetlaca (the sun’s herb that shimmers)=pl. 51 Badianus (C-B fol.
30r)=Oxalis tetraphylla (Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Malvaceae (Guerra
1952; Reko 1947) or Marsilea mollis (Bye and Linares 2013) or Brassicaceae
(Guerra 1952)
toonchichi/tonchichi=Solanum nigrum (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010)
topoçan/tepozán=pl. 81 Badianus (C-B fol. 45r)=FC577=Buddleja americana
(Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or B. cordata
(Díaz 1976)
torna-loco=Datura ceratocaula (Safford 1920)
torote=Bursera fagaroides (Elaphrium fagaroides, E. odoratum) or Bursera
tecomaca (Elaphrium tecomaca) or Jatropha cardiophylla (Díaz 1976)
totecyxiuh/to-tēuc i-xiuh/totec ixoxochiuh (our lord’s herb)=pl. 110 Badianus (C-B
fol. 59v)=FC=Heliotropium sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952; Miranda
and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Nama undulata
(Linares and Bye 2013) or Heliotropium curassavicum (Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Tournefortia sp. (Guerra 1952)
totecyxochitl=Sesuvium portulacastrum (Díaz 1976)
totocaplllin/totocapolin=p. 432 Hernandez Rerum/p. 908 Hernandez Historia=?
totocuit laxil/totocuitlatl=p. 433 Hernandez Rerum/p. 734 Hernandez
Historia=Psittacanthus calyculatus (Díaz 1976)
totolcuitatzapotl=FC416=Diospyros nigra (D. ebenaster, D. digyna) (Díaz 1976;
Estrada Lugo 1989)
totolicxitl=Artemisia ludoviciana subsp. redolens (A. redolens) (Díaz 1976)
totolinyxochitl=Bocconia arborea (Díaz 1976)
totomatic=Margaranthus solanaceus or Nicandra physalodes (Díaz 1976)
totoncapatli=p. 115 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1023 Hernandez Historia=Galphimia
glauca (Thryallis glauca) (Díaz 1976)
totoncaxihuitl/totoncaxiuitl=FC526=Senna occidentalis (Cassia occidentalis) or
Senna alata (Cassia alata) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Ortiz de Montellano
1975, 1990)
totoncaxoxocoyollin=Begonia gracilis (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010)
totonquixochitl/totōnqui xōchitl (hot/fever flower)=pl. 67 Badianus (2 plants) (C-B
fol. 38r)=Ruellia sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Mimulus cardinalis or Ipomoea
sp. (Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Ipomoea conzattii (Exogonium
conzatii) (Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Penstemon roseus (Linares
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
297
and Bye 2013) or Cordia sebestena (Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Distimake
tuberosus (Ipomoea tuberosa) (Guerra 1952)
totopsotz/totopzots=Malvastrum coromandelianum (Díaz 1976)
tototzapotl=Sideroxylon tepicense (S. mexicanum) (Díaz 1976)
totoyczitl=p. 256 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1000 Hernandez Historia=Merremia
tuberosa (Ipomoea tuberosa) (Díaz 1976)
toxcuitlapilxochitl/toxcuitlapulxochitl=Lobelia laxiflora (Díaz 1976)
toxichec cimarron=Mikania cordifolia (Díaz 1976)
toxob=Caesalpinia vesicaria (Díaz 1976)
tozancuitlaxcolli=FC=Canna indica (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
tozcuitlapil xochitl=p. 282 Hernandez Rerum/p. 735 Hernandez Historia=Canna
indica?
tozcuitlapil xochitl=p. 282 Hernandez Rerum/p. 736 Hernandez Historia=Maranta
arundinacea?
tozpatli=Dorstenia contrajerva (Díaz 1976)
tragorigano=p. 196 Hernandez Rerum/p. 230 Hernandez Historia=Clinopodium
macrostemum (Díaz 1976)
tsayaltsay=Anoda cristata (Díaz 1976)
tsayuntsal=Mentzelia hispida (Díaz 1976)
tsayuntsay=Priva lappulacea (Díaz 1976)
tsocosnichat=Dioscorea floribunda (Díaz 1976)
tsots-k-ab=Mentzelia hispida (Díaz 1976)
tsots’kab=Mentzelia aspera (Díaz 1976)
tsotz=Brosimum alicastrum (Díaz 1976)
tsulubtock=Bauhinia subrotundifolia (B. spathacea) (Díaz 1976)
ts’itsil-xiu=Erigeron canadensis (Díaz 1976)
ts’ui-che=Pithecellobium unguis-cati (Díaz 1976)
ts’uts’uk-al’=Cissampelos pareira (Díaz 1976)
tuche=Clinopodium macrostemum (Calamintha macrostema, Satureja macrostema)
(Díaz 1976)
tuk’=Acrocomia aculeata (A. mexicana) (Díaz 1976)
tulasuchil=Tecoma stans (Díaz 1976)
tumutsali=Tagetes liucida (Díaz 1976)
tutsuy-kiu=Mirabilis jalapa (Díaz 1976)
tuzpatli=Dorstenia contrajerva (Díaz 1976)
tzacatepahtli=Asphodelus ramosus (Díaz 1976)
tzacouhxochitl (glue flower)=pl. 97 Badianus (C-B fol. 53r)=Bletia campanulata
(Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or B. coccinea (Miranda and Valdés
1964) or Catasetum maculatum or Prosthechea pastoris (Encyclia pastoris,
Epidendrum pastoris)?
tzacutli/tzacuhtli/tzautli=p. 283 Hernandez Rerum/p. 377 Hernandez
Historia=FC665=Prosthechea pastoris (Encyclia pastoris, Epidendrum pastoris) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Ossenbach 2009) or Bletia sp. or Govenia
sp. or Trichocentrum cebolleta (Oncidium cebolleta) (Berdan 2007) or Bletia
campanulata (Estrada Lugo 1989)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
298
tzacuxilotl=Arpophyllum spicatum?
tzacuxochitl/tzacuxochitlxiuitl=FC721b=Bletia campanulata (Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1989; Ossenbach 2009; Ortiz de Montellano 1990) or Bletia coccinea
(Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Prosthechea vitellina (Epidendrum
vitellinum)
tzaguangueni=p. 148 Hernandez Rerum/p. 567 Hernandez Historia=Artemisia
ludoviciana subsp. redolens (A. redolens) (Díaz 1976)
tzalmuy=Annona squamosa (Díaz 1976)
tzanaicxitl=Asplenium trichomanes (Díaz 1976)
tzaponochnopalli=FC=Opuntia ficus-indica (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
tzaponochtli=Opuntia ficus-indica (Díaz 1976)
tzapotl/tzapoquauitl/tzapotes/zapotes=FC411=Manilkara zapota (Achras sapota)
(Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Zepeda and White 2008) or Casimiroa edulis
(Zepeda and White 2008) or Pouteria dominigensis (Lucuma dominigensis)
(Díaz 1976) or Diospyros nigra (D. digyna) or Manilkara zapota (Achras sapota,
Lucuma mammosa) or Sideroxylon sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tzatzanaco=Celtis caudata (Díaz 1976)
tzatzapalli=FC=Zea mays (Estrada Lugo 1989; Rivera Morales 1941)
tzatzayanalquiltic=FC558=Rhodosciadium tuberosum (Deanea tuberosa) (Díaz
1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Farfán and Elferink 2010)
tzatzequa=Urera baccifera (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
tzatzupu=Sapindus saponaria (Díaz 1976)
tzauc-xōchitl (glue flower)=pl. 97 Badianus (C-B fol. 53r)=Bletia or Laelia sp. (de
Ávila Blomberg 2012)
tzauhzilotl/tzauxilotl=Arpophyllum spicatum (Díaz 1976; Ossenbach 2009)
tzacouhxochitl/tzauxochitl (glue flower)=pl. 97 Badianus (C-B. fol. 53r)=p. 433
Hernandez Rerum=Orchidaceae (Reko 1947) or Bletia campanulata or
Prosthechea pastoris (Epidendrum pastoris) or Catasetum maculatum
tzayanalquititl/tzaianalquitl/tzauāna-l-quilitl (quelite cut in pieces/torn edible
herb)=pl. 79 Badianus (C-B fol. 44r)=Rhodosciadium tuberosum (Deanea
tuberosa) (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Pico and Nuez
2000b; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947)
tzayentzal=Priva lappulacea (Díaz 1976; Martinez 1969:502)
tzazalicpatli/zazalicpatli=p. 434 Hernandez Rerum/p. 835 Hernandez Historia=?
tzicatzontecomatl=p. 254 Hernandez Rerum/p. 445 Hernandez Historia=Spermacoce
tenella (Díaz 1976)
tzicozapotl=Manilkara zapota (Dressler 1953)
tzicxochitl=Laelia anceps (Ossenbach 2009)
tzihuaccopalli/tzīhuac-copalli (tzihuac-like copal tree)=pl. 88 Badianus (C-B fol.
48v)=Bursera sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko
1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Bursera bipinnata (Linares and Bye 2013)
or Discocactus flagelliformis (Nyctocereus serpentinus) (Guerra 1952)
tzilacayometl=FC=Agave sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tzilacayotli=FC=Cucurbita ficifolia (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Farfán and
Elferink 2010) or Melothria pendula (M. guadalupensis) or M. scabra (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
299
tzinacanatlapatli=p. 435 Hernandez Rerum=Passiflora coriacea?
tzinacancuitlaquahuitl=p. 58 Hernandez Rerum/p. 560 Hernandez Historia=Mimosa
sp.?
tzipipatli/hueipatli=FC=Senecio sessilifolius (S. cardiophyllus) (Estrada Lugo
1989)
tziritzecua=Prosopis juliflora (Díaz 1976)
tzitzcatzquilitl/tzitzicazquilitl (edible nettle)=FC467b=Urtica urens (Estrada Lugo
1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a)
tzitzicazquilitl=Cnidoscolus urens (Jatropha urens) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
tzitzicaztli=FC510=Cnidoscolus urens (Jatropha urens) (Díaz 1976;Estrada Lugo
1989) or Gronovia scandens (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tzitzicion=Gymnosperma glutinosum (Selloa glutinosa) (Díaz 1976)
tzictli=FC=Manilkara zapota (Achras sapota)?
tzitzicton/tzītzictōn (insignificant little chewing gums)=pl. 46, 64 Badianus (C-B
fol. 27v, 36v)=Gymnosperma glutinosum (Selloa glutinosa) (Bye and Linares
2013; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013; Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al.
1992) or Asclepias [notha?] (de Ávila Blomberg 2012)
tzitzicton (insignificant little chewing gums)=pl. 64 Badianus (C-B fol.
36v)=Asclepias [notha?] (de Ávila Blomberg 2012)
tzitziqui=Tagetes lucida (Díaz 1976)
tzitziquilitl (dark green edible herb)=FC468b=Bidens pilosa (Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Tagetes sp. (Estrada Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a) or Erigeron pusillus
(Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or T. tenuifolia (T. peduncularis) or Zinnia elegans (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tzocoijoyo=Magnolia mexicana (Talauma mexicana) (Díaz 1976)
tzocuxochitl=Bletia campanulata (Díaz 1976)
tzompachtzin (precious hairy, woolly one)=pl. 76 Badianus (C-B fol. 42r)=Solanum
donianum (S. verbascifolium) (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Sedum sp. (Miranda
and Valdés 1964)
tzompantle/ztompantli/tzompacuahuitl/tzompanquahuitl/
tzompanquauitl=FC689a=Erythrina americana (Altamirano 1896; del Pozo 1966;
Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or E. coralloides (Díaz 1976) or E. mexicana
(Estrada Lugo 1989) or Escobedia sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tzompilihuitzpatli=Mimulus rupestris (Díaz 1976)
tzompotonic=Pseudognaphalium conoideum (Gnaphalium conoideum) (Díaz 1976)
tzonayotli=Luffa acutangula or L. cylindrica or L. operculata (Díaz 1976)
tzonpilihuizpahtli (cold in the head medicine)=pl. 42 Badianus (C-B fol. 23v)=?
tzonpilihuiz xihuitl (thorny cold-in-the-head plant/catarrh herb)=pl. 24, 51 Badianus
(C-B fol. 15v, 30r)=Mimulus rupestris (Díaz 1976; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Agastache mexicana (C. mexicana) (Guerra
1952; Reko 1947) or Galium mexicanum (Bye and Linares 2013) or Galium sp.
(Guerra 1952)
tzonpotonic=Blumea viscosa (Conyza lyrata)?
tzontecomanacatl=FC457b=Amanita muscaria (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
tzontecpatli=Jatropha cordata (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
300
tzonxochitl=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C. anomala, C. grandiflora)
(Díaz 1976)
tzonpelchichixochitl/tzopel-chi-chil-xochitl=Malvaviscus arboreus or Kosteletzkya
pentacarpos (Hibiscus pentacarpos) (Díaz 1976)
tzopelicacococ (sweetness-spicy)=pl. 35 Badianus (C-B fol. 21r)=Phyla scaberrima (Lippia dulcis) (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947)
tzontecomatl tzopilotl=Swietenia mahagoni (de Batres et al. 2012)
tzontecomaxochitl=FC=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C. anomala) or
Stanhopea tigrina (Estrada Lugo 1989)
tzopiliquauitl=Swietenia mahagoni (Díaz 1976)
tzopilotl/tzopilotlizontecomatl=Swietenia humilis (Díaz 1976)
tzopilotlzonte=Swietenia mahagoni (Díaz 1976)
tzopotonic=Pseudognaphalium canescens (Gnaphalium canescens) (Díaz 1976)
tzupelicxuihuitl=Phyla scaberrima (Lippia dulcis) (Díaz 1976)
tzotzocaxihuitl (wart herb)=pl. 96 Badianus (C-B fol. 52r)=Euphorbia helioscopia
(Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
tzotzotlani (glistening plant)=pl. 65 Badianus (C-B fol. 37r)=Solanum donianum
(S. verbascifolium) (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
uacalxochitl=FC709=Philodendron tripartitum (P. affine) or P. sagittifolium
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
uaxin/uaxi=FC422=Leucaena leucocephala (L. glauca) (Díaz 1976 ) or L. esculenta
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
uauhquilitl/uauhtli=FC462=Amaranthus cruentus (A. paniculatus) (Estrada Lugo
1989) or A. caudatus?
ueinacaztli/ueynacaztli=FC=Chiranthodendron pentadactylon or Cymbopetalum
penduliflorum or Enterolobium cyclocarpum (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ueipatli=FC=Solanum donianum (S. verbascifolium) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
[h]uelicpahtli (delicious remedy)=pl. 55 Badianus (C-B fol. 32r)=Ipomoea purga
(Bye and Linares 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
or Operculina sp. (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Ipomoea sp. (Guerra 1952)
ueuei itzontecon=FC=Gomphrena serrata (G. decumbens) (Estrada Lugo 1989;
Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Helenium mexicanum (Díaz 1976)
uexotl=FC=Salix sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
uitzitzilmetl=FC=Agave xylonacantha (Estrada Lugo 1989)
uitzitzilxochitl/uitzilxochitl=FC702a=Loeselia mexicana (L. coccinea) or Myroxylon
balsamum var. pereirae (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
uitzocuitlapilli=FC758a=Disocactus flagelliformis (Aporocactus flagelliformis)
(Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
uitzocuitlapilxiuitl=Bocconia frutescens (Díaz 1976)
uitzquauitl=FC390=Caesalpinia echinata (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or
Haematoxylum brasiletto or H. campechianum (Estrada Lugo 1989)
uitzquilitl (prickly edible herb)=FC471a=Cirsium mexicanum (Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Cnicus sp. (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
301
ulquahuitl/ulquauoitl/ulli=FC=Castilla elastica (Comas et al. 1995; Estrada Lugo
1989)
utlatl=FC=Baccharis sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
utspeki/utsuppek/u-tsuts-pec/utsubilul=Tabernaemontana amygdalifolia (Díaz 1976)
uxitl=Pinus teocote? (Ocaranza 2011)
uzte=Malpighia souzae (Díaz 1976)
vexotl=Salix pentandra? (Ocaranza 2011)
xaan/xan=Sabal yapa (Inodes japa) (Díaz 1976)
xahualyztic=p. 437 Hernandez Rerum=Fabaceae?
xahuique=Anticlea frigida (Stenanthium frigidum, Veratrum frigidum) (Díaz 1976)
xalacotli/xalacocotli=FC726=Arracacia atropurpurea (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989)
xalatlacense=Solanum lycopersicum (Lycopersicum esculentum) (Díaz 1976)
xaltomatl/xāl-tomatl (sand tomato)=pl. 14, 30, 79, 106 Badianus (C-B fol. 10v, 18v,
44r, 57v)=FC485, 537=Jaltomata procumbens (Saracha jaltomata) (Bye and
Linares 2013; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra
1952; Ocaranza 2011; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Physalis mollis (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
xalxocotl/xacocotl/xalcocotl=FC419=Psidium guajava (Psidium pomiferum)
(Altamirano 1896; Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952;
Ortiz de Montellano 1975, 1990; Reko 1947; Zepeda and White 2008)
xanabmucuy=Euphorbia parviflora (E. pilulifera) (Díaz 1976)
xanacol/xanacotl=Pseudobombax ellipticum (Bombax ellipticum) (Díaz 1976)
xanatl=Morus celtidifolia (M. microphylla) (Díaz 1976)
xate=Argemone mexicana (Díaz 1976)
xauay=Euphorbia parviflora (E. pilulifera) (Díaz 1976)
xaxachichitl=Calea zacatechichi (Díaz 1976)
xaxaxacotic/xaxaxaoti=Galphimia glauca (Díaz 1976)
xaxim=Leucaena leucocephala (L. glauca) (Díaz 1976)
xaxocotl/xalxocotl/xāl-xocotl (sand sour fruit)=pl. 53, 79 Badianus (C-B fol. 31r,
44r)=Psidium guajava (Bye and Linares 2013a; de Ávila Blomberg 2012;
Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
xaxocoyol=FC=Oxalis sp. (Estrada Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a)
xaxox=Solanum donianum (S. verbascifolium) (Díaz 1976)
xayillol/xayil-lol=Anredera baselloides (Boussingaultia baselloides) (Díaz 1976)
xcantiris=Acacia farnesiana (Díaz 1976)
xcunche=Pseudobombas ellipticum (Bombax ellipticum) (Díaz 1976)
xeigia=Prunus serotina subsp. capuli (P. capuli) (Díaz 1976)
xexihuitl (plant growing in stony places)=pl. 65 Badianus (C-B fol. 37r)=Arracacia
sp.? (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
xezetzi=Artemisia ludoviciana subsp. redolens (A. redolens) (Díaz 1976)
xhalalnal/xhotalnan=Celosia virgata (Díaz 1976)
xiaxiu=Evolvulus alsinoides (Díaz 1976)
xicalan=Bursera copallifera (Bursera jorullensis, Elaphrium jorullense) (Díaz
1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
302
xicama=p. 309 Hernandez Rerum/p. 522 Hernandez Historia=FC481a=Pachyrhizus
erosus (P. angulatus, P. palmatilobus) (Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953; Estrada Lugo
1989)
xicamatic=Ipomoea jicama (Díaz 1976)
xichocopal=Bursera linanoe (B. aloexylon) (Díaz 1976)
xicora=Lophophora williamsii (Díaz 1976)
xicotzapotl=FC415=Manilkara zapota (Achras sapota, Lucuma mammosa) (Díaz
1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Standley 1920–1926:1119)
xihuicxan/xihuixcan=Pseudobombax ellipticum (Bombax ellipticum) (Díaz 1976)
xihuitl tonalco mochiua hahuachcho (plant which comes up in the dry season and
gets covered with dew)=pl. 12 Badianus (C-B fol. 9v)=Mirabilis sp.? (Bye and
Linares 2013; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947)
xik-che=Zanthoxylum fagara (Díaz 1976)
xikin=Calea zacatechichi (Díaz 1976)
xilochitl=FC=Pachira insignis, Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C. grandiflora) (Farfán and Elferink 2010) or Pseudobombax ellipticum (Bombax
ellipticum)?
xilometl=FC=Agave sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
xilotl/xilote=Zea mays (Rivera Morales 1941)
xiloxochicuahuitl=Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C. anomala, C. grandiflora) (Díaz 1976)
xiloxochitl (milky corn silk flower)=pl. 89 Badianus (C-B fol.
49r)=FC693=FC=Pseudobombax ellipticum (Bombax ellipticum) (Alcántara
Rojas 2008; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Zepeda
and White 2008) or Calliandra houstoniana var. anomala (C. anomala, C. grandiflora) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Caesalpinia
pulcherrima (Díaz 1976) or Pachira aquatica (Díaz 1976) or P. insignis (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
ximene=Persea americana (P. gratissima) (Díaz 1976)
xiopatla=Gaulthera acuminata (G. nitida) (Díaz 1976)
xiopatli=Senna occidentalis (Cassia occidentalis) (Díaz 1976)
xiote=Pseudosmodingium perniciosum (Díaz 1976)
xitomatl/xiomate=Solanum lycopersicum (Díaz 1976; Dressler 1953)
xitrus=Cardiospermum halicacabum (Díaz 1976)
xiuehcapahtli/xiuhhecapatli/xiuhehcapahtli/xihuecapahtli/xiuhecapatli/xiuhehēca-pahtli (plant wind medicine)=pl. 7, 65, 66, 75, 95, 99, 113 Badianus (C-B
fol. 7r, 37r, 37v, 42r, 52r, 54r, 61r)=Senna occidentalis (Cassia occidentalis) (de
Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947; Miranda and Valdés
1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Senna septemtrionalis (Bye and Linares
2013; Linares and Bye 2013)
xiuh[h]amolli (herbaceous soap)=pl. 11 Badianus (C-B fol. 9r)=Ipomoea murucoides (de Batres et al. 2012; Guerra 1952) or Ipomoea sp. (Bye and Linares 2013;
Reko 1947; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
xiuheloquilitl/xiuhhēlōquilitl (green, tender edible plant)=pl. 108 Badianus (C-B
fol. 58v)=Bidens aurea (B. tetragona) (Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952;
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
303
Reko 1947) or Galinsoga sp. (de Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Bidens pilosa (Linares
and Bye 2013)
xiuhpahtli (herbaceous remedy/turquoise remedy)=pl. 67, 108 Badianus (C-B fol.
38r, 58v)=Tigridia pavonia (Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Reko 1947; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Tigridia sp. (Guerra 1952)
xiuhquilitl=FC=Zapoteca formosa (Calliandra gracilis) or Indigofera suffruticosa
(I. anil) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
xiuhtlemaytl (herbaceous incense burner)=pl. 85 Badianus (C-B fol. 47r)=Pectis
sp.? (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947)
xiuhtontli (small plant)=pl. 33, 52, 57, 64, 80 Badianus (C-B fol. 20r, 30v, 33r, 36v,
44v)=?
xiuquilitl/xiuquilitlpitzahoac=Indigofera suffruticosa (Altamirano 1896; Díaz 1976;
Dressler 1953)
xoalacatl=Heliocereus speciosus (Díaz 1976)
xochicacahoatl=Theobroma cacao (Díaz 1976)
xochicamotli=FC=Ipomoea batatas (Estrada Lugo 1989)
xochicintli=FC=Zea mays (Estrada Lugo 1989; Rivera Morales 1941)
xochicopalli=p. 49 Hernandez Rerum/p. 539 Hernandez Historia=?
xochinacaztli/xochinacastle (ear flower)=p. 30 Hernandez Rerum=Cymbopetalum
penduliflorum (Bye and Linares 1990; Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010;
Safford 1910, 1912)
xochiocotzol/xōchi-oco-tzotl=pl. 28, 34, 65, 92, 104 Badianus (C-B fol. 17v, 20v,
37r, 50v, 56v)=Liquidambar styraciflua (L. macrophylla) (de Ávila Blomberg
2012; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Reko 1947)
xochiocotzoquahuitl/xochiocotzotl quauhxihuitl=p. 56 Hernandez Rerum/p. 359
Hernandez Historia=FC=Liquidambar styraciflua (Comas et  al. 1995; Díaz
1976; Estrada Lugo,1989; Ortiz de Montellano 1975)
xochipali/xochipalli/xochipatli=FC=Cosmos sulphureus (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989) or Bonellia macrocarpa subsp. macrocarpa (Jacquinia aurantiaca)
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
xochipitzahoac=Polygala scoparia or P. verticillata (Díaz 1976)
xococquauitl/xoco-c cuahuitl (sour tree)=pl. 69 Badianus (C-B fol. 39r)=Conostegia
xalapensis (Guerra 1952; Reko 1947; Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés
1964; Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Leandra sp. or Miconia sp. (de Ávila
Blomberg 2012)
xococotl=FC=Rumex patientia (Estrada Lugo 1989)
xocoitztli=Solanum angustifolium (S. cornutum) (Díaz 1976)
xoconochnopalli/xoconochtli=FC=Cylindropuntia imbricata (Opuntia imbricata)
(Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
xocoatl=Theobroma cacao (Comas et al. 1995; Zepeda and White 2008)
xocotl=Spondias purpurea (Dressler 1953)
xocoxochitl=Pimenta dioica (P. officinalis) (Díaz 1976; Ocaranza 2011)
xolometl=p. 275 Hernandez Rerum/p. 1048 Hernandez Historia=Agave sp.?
xoloxiltic=Piqueria trinervia (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
304
xomalin/tomali/tomalli (primary name)=pl. 110 Badianus (C-B fol. 59v)=FC=Juncus
sp. (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947) or Cyperus sp. (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
xometontli=Senna occidentalis (Cassia occidentalis) (Díaz 1976)
xonacatl=FC=Allium sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
xonecuili=Heimia salicifolia (Díaz 1976)
xonequilitl=Gymnosperma glutinosum (Selloa glutinosa) (Díaz 1976)
xonitlzal=Piqueria trinervia (Díaz 1976)
xopancelia=Selaginella lepidophylla or S. sellowii (S. rupestris) (Díaz 1976)
xoxocoiolcuecuepoc (flowering sorrel)=FC=Oxalis sp. (Estrada Lugo 1987 in Pico
and Nuez 2000a)
xoxocoiolhuiuila (creeping sorrel)=Oxalis sp.?
xoxocoiol hoihoilan (very bitter)=p. 440 Hernandez Rerum=FC=Oxalis sp. (Estrada
Lugo 1987 in Pico and Nuez 2000a)
xoxocoyolhuiuila=FC=Oxalis stricta (Estrada Lugo 1989)
xoxocoyoli=FC=Oxalis sp. or O. violacea (Estrada Lugo 1989)
xoxocoyolcuecuepoc=FC=Biophytum dendroides (Oxalis dendroides) or Oxalis sp.
(Estrada Lugo 1989)
xoxocoyoltic/xoxocoioltic =FC540=Oxalis albicans (Estrada Lugo 1987 in Pico and
Nuez 2000a; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Oxalis frutescens subsp. angustifolia (O.
angustifolia) (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or O. verticillata (Estrada Lugo
1989)
xoxocquauitl=Conostegia xalapensis (Díaz 1976)
xoxonitzal/xoxonitztac=Piqueria trinervia (Díaz 1976)
xoxouhcapa[h]tli (blue/green remedy/ blue medicine)=FC=Datura sp. (Daunay
et al. 2008; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Caesalpinia cirsta (Estrada Lugo 1989)
xoxouhcapahtli (blue/green remedy/blue medicine)=pl. 43, 63 Badianus (C-B fol.
26r, 36r)=FC=Caesalpinia crista (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989) or Lepidium
virginicum (Linares and Bye 2013) or Lepidium sp. (Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
or Hyptis sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Turbina corymbosa (Rivea corymbosa) (Guerra 1952)
xoxohqui matlalxochitl=pl. 14 Badianus (C-B fol. 10v)=Commelina sp. (Guerra
1952)
xoxouhquipahtli (blue/green remedy/blue medicine)=pl. 22 Badianus (C-B fol.
14v)=Caesalpinia pulcherrima (Bye and Linares 2013 ) or Caesalpinia crista
(Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or Hyptis sp.?
xoy=Melampodium divaricatum (Díaz 1976)
xumetl=Sambucus canadensis (S. mexicana) (Díaz 1976; Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
xunalixase=Croton ciliatoglandulifer (Díaz 1976)
xunequitl/xunequitzio=Gaudichaudia cynanchoides (Díaz 1976)
yacaquilitl=Cuphea jorullensis (Díaz 1976)
yamancapatli=Euphorbia serpens (E. radicans) (Farfán and Elferink 2010)
yamanquipatlis/yamanquipahtli/yamanquipatli (gentle or weak medicine)=pl. 78
Badianus (C-B fol. 43v)=p. 138 Hernandez Rerum=FC=Manihot angustiloba
(Estrada Lugo 1989; Guerra 1952; Reko 1947) or Asclepias verticillata (Díaz
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
305
1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Miranda and Valdés 1964) or Manihot sp. (Estrada
Lugo 1989) or M. rubricaulis
yamanquitexochitl/texochitl yamanqui (soft stone-flower)=pl. 64 Badianus (C-B
fol. 36v)=Selaginella sp. (Reko 1947) or S. lepidophylla (Miranda and Valdés
1964)
yamate=Asclepias subulata (Díaz 1976)
yapaxiutl=FC=Amaranthus sp. or Croton diocus (Estrada Lugo 1989)
yauhtli=Tagetes lucida (Díaz 1976; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Reko 1947)
yaxhalache=Euphorbia tithymaloides subsp. parasitica (Pedilanthus itzaeus) (Díaz
1976)
ychcatlepatli/ichcatlepatli=p. 442 Hernandez=Solanum scandens?
ycxitecuan=Schaffneria nigripes (Phyllitis nigripes) (Díaz 1976)
yecapixtla=Psittacanthus calyculatus (Díaz 1976)
yecuxoton=FC=Nicotiana tabacum (Estrada Lugo 1989)
yehcapaztzin=Senna occidentalis (Cassia laevigata) (Díaz 1976)
yehuanitzoz=Serjania mexicana (Díaz 1976)
yepacihuitl=Croton dioicus or C. vulpinus (Díaz 1976)
yetl=Nicotiana spp. (Daunay et al. 2008; Dressler 1953)
yiamoli/yiamolli/yamole=FC461b,759b=Phytolacca octandra (Díaz 1976; Estrada
Lugo 1989) or P. americana (P. decandra) or P. longespica or P. rugosa (Estrada
Lugo 1989)
yichcayo=FC=Rhodosciadium tuberosum (Deanea tuberosa) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
or Gossypium sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
yietl=FC=Nicotiana tabacum (N. mexicana) (Estrada Lugo 1989)
ylin/īlīn (alder)=pl. 84, 87 Badianus (C-B fol. 46v, 48r)=Alnus sp. (de Ávila
Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Reko 1947; Valdés
Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
yllamatlantli=p. 443 Hernandez Rerum=Solanum lycopersicum?
yollopatli (heart-medicine)=Magnolia mexicana?
yolo chichiltic=p. 445 Hernandez Rerum/p. 68 Hernandez Historia=Chromolaena
collina (Eupatorium collinum)?
yolloxochitl/iolloxochitl/yoloxochitl/yollochicuahuitl/yōlloh-xōchitl (heart
flower)=pl. 59, 60, 98, 104 Badianus (C-B fol. 34r, 34v, 53v, 56v)=p. 40
Hernandez Rerum=FC=Magnolia mexicana (Talauma mexicana) (Alcántara
Rojas 2008; de Ávila Blomberg 2012; del Pozo 1966; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989; Farfán and Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda
and Valdés 1964; Ocaranza 2011; Ortiz de Montellano. 1990; Valdés Gutiérrez
et al. 1992; Zepeda and White 2008) or M. virginiana (M. glauca) (Estrada Lugo
1989)
yolochiachitl=Psoralea glandulosa (Díaz 1976)
yolochichi/yolochichil/yolochichiltic=Chromolaena collina (Eupatorium collinum)
(Díaz 1976)
yolochichitl=Chromolaena collina (Eupatorium collinum) or Ageratina petiolaris
(Eupatorium petiolare) (Díaz 1976)
yoloxiltic=Piqueria trinervia (Díaz 1976)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
306
yoloxochitl=Chromolaena collina (Eupatorium collinum) or Magnolia mexicana
(Talauma mexicana) or M. macrophylla (Díaz 1976)
yoxanitztac/yoxonitzal=Piqueria trinervia (Díaz 1976)
yoyotl/yoyote/yoyotli=Cascabela thevetia (Thevetia neriifolia) (del Pozo 1966) or
Cascabela thevetioides (Thevetia yccotli) (Díaz 1976)
ytacchyatl/yztaccihuatl=p. 208 Hernandez Rerum/p. 896 Hernandez
Historia=Erigeron sp.?
ytzaccococtlacotli/yztaccococtlacotl=p. 450 Hernandez Rerum/p. 625 Hernandez
Historia=?
ytzcuimpatli (dog medicine)=p. 307 Hernandez Rerum=Schoenocaulon officinale
(Veratrum officinale)?
ytzticpatli=p. 116 Hernandez Rerum=Manihot sp.?
ytzuquatzitziqui=Solandra maxima (Datura maxima) (Díaz 1976)
yumate=Asclepias subulata (Díaz 1976)
yuripitzqua/yuriripitaqua=Desmodium orbiculare (Díaz 1976)
yxiayaual=FC=Scutellaria caerulea (Estrada Lugo 1989)
yyacxihuitl=p. 448 Hernandez Rerum/p. 852 Hernandez Historia=Cestrum sp.?
yyamolin=Phytolacca octandra (Díaz 1976)
yyauhitl/yiauhtli/iyauhtli/yyahhitl (to incense)/quauhyyauhtli (forest incense)=pl.
91 Badianus (C-B fol. 50r)=FC508a, 628=p. 160 Hernandez Rerum/p. 969
Hernandez Historia=p. 288 Sahagún=Tagetes lucida (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo
1989; Guerra 1952; Ortiz de Montellano 1990)
yyauhtzin=Crataegus laevigata (C. oxyacantha) (Díaz 1976)
yzhoatomatl=Solanum lycopersicum (Díaz 1976)
yzquixochitl/īzqui-xōchitl (popcorn flower)=pl. 69, 70, 78, 80 Badianus (C-B fol.
39r, 39v, 43v, 44v)=Bourreria huanita (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Farfán and
Elferink 2010; Guerra 1952; Linares and Bye 2013; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992)
or Bourreria sp. (Miranda and Valdés 1964)
yztachuitzquahuitl/iztāc huitzcuahuitl (white spiny tree)=pl. 109 Badianus (C-B.
fol. 58v, 59r)=Haematoxylum campechianum (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Linares
and Bye 2013; Valdés Gutiérrez et al. 1992) or H. brasiletto (Miranda and Valdés
1964) or Condalia hookeri (C. obovata) (Guerra 1952)
yztac ocoxochitl (white pine flower)=pl. 7, 54, 61, 74, 79, 92 Badianus (C-B fol.
7r, 31v, 35r, 42v, 44r, 50v)=Didymaea mexicana (Miranda and Valdés 1964;
Reko 1947)
yztacpahtli (white medicine)=pl. 25 Badianus (C-B fol. 16r)=Mimosa sp. (Bye and
Linares 2013; Guerra 1952)
yztacquauitl (white tree)=pl. 68 Badianus (C-B fol. 38v)=Acacia [coulteri] (de
Ávila Blomberg 2012) or Eysenhardtia polystachya (Linares and Bye 2013) or
Fabaceae (Guerra 1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
yztacquauhxiotl/iztāc cuahuitl=p. 57 Hernandez Rerum/p. 551 Hernandez
Historia=Bursera fagaroides (Elaphrium fagaroides) (Díaz 1976)
yztacquauhxiotl=p. 57 Hernandez Rerum/p. 552 Hernandez Historia=Bursera
tecomaca (Elaphrium tecomaca)?
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
307
yztactalamatl=p. 452 Hernandez Rerum/p. 258 Hernandez Historia=Desmodium
cinereum (Díaz 1976)
yztauhyattl/yztauhtyatili/iztauhyatl (salty water)=pl. 43 Badianus (C-B fol. 26r)=p.
288 Sahagún=Artemisia mexicana (de Ávila Blomberg 2012; Díaz 1976; Guerra
1952; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
zazalic/zazalicpatli=FC=Mentzelia hispida (Farfán and Elferink 2010; Ocaranza
2011) or Bidens sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Perymenium pringlei (Estrada Lugo
1989)
zacamatlalin/çacamatlalin/zaca-mātlalin (grassy matlalin)=pl. 75, 87 Badianus
(C-B fol. 42r, 48r)=Commelina sp. (Guerra 1952) or Tradescantia sp. (de Ávila
Blomberg 2012; Guerra 1952; Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or Commelina
coelestis (Linares and Bye 2013; Miranda and Valdés 1964)
zacacamototontin=Juncus balticus subsp. mexicanus (J. mexicanus) (Díaz 1976)
zacachichi/zacachichic=Calea zacatechichi or Conyza filaginoides (Díaz 1976)
zacahuitztli=Cenchrus echinatus (Díaz 1976)
zacamalinalli=FC=Baccharis sp. or Elymus sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
zacamatlalin=Commelina coelestris (Díaz 1976)
zacanahuiteputz=Verbesina crocata (Díaz 1976)
zacacotl=Cassia grandis (C. braziliana) or C. fistula (Díaz 1976)
zacapipillolxochitl=Lonicera pilosa (Díaz 1976)
zacapolin=Cenchrus tribuloides (de Batres et al. 2012; Díaz 1976)
zacatechichi=Calea zacatechichi (Díaz 1976)
zacateteztli=FC=Panicum sp. (Estrada Lugo 1989)
zacatlamiahoalli=Erigeron affinis (Díaz 1976)
zacatlaxcale/zacatlaxcalli=FC=Cuscuta tinctoria (Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989)
or C. americana or C. odontolepis (Estrada Lugo 1989)
zayoliscan/zayolitzcan/zayolizan/zayolizcan/zayolizcan=Buddleja americana or B.
cordata (Díaz 1976)
zasale/zazalic=Mentzelia hispida (Díaz 1976)
zazaltzin=Perymenium rude (Díaz 1976)
zazamil=Cordia alba (C. dentata) (Díaz 1976)
zazanaczochitl=Aristolochia odoratissima (Díaz 1976)
zihoapactli/zihuatlapatl=Montanoa tomentosa (Díaz 1976)
zihuatlpatl=Buddleja sessiflora (B. verticillata) (Díaz 1976)
zoapatle/zoapatli=Montanoa floribunda or M. frutescens or M. tomentosa (Díaz
1976)
zohzoyat/zohzoyatic/zohzōyātic (full of palm leaves)/çoçoyatic/zozoyatic=pl. 102
Badianus (C-B fol. 55v)=p. 144 Hernandez Rerum/p. 855 Hernandez
Historia=Anticlea frigida (Stenanthium frigidum, Veratrum frigidum) (Comas
et al. 1995; Díaz 1976; Estrada Lugo 1989; Miranda and Valdés 1964; Ocaranza
2011; Zepeda and White 2008) or Schoenocaulon caricifolium (S.coulteri) (de
Ávila Blomberg 2012; Ortiz de Montellano 1990) or Echeandia mexicana
(Linares and Bye 2013) or Agave sp. (Valdés Gutiérrez et  al. 1992) or
Schoenocaulon sp. or Zygadenus sp.(Estrada Lugo 1989) or Schoenocaulon officinale (Veratrum sabadilla) (Estrada Lugo 1989) or Anticlea sp. (Guerra 1952)
Appendix A: Names of Plants Used by the Nahua, 16th Century to the Present
308
zolcoanenepilli=Physalis nicandroides (Díaz 1976)
zompantle=Buddleja americana or Erythrina coralloiides (Díaz 1976)
zopilocuahuitl=Swietenia humilis (Díaz 1976)
zopilote/zopilotl=Swietenia humilis (S. cirrhata) or S. macrophylla (Díaz 1976)
